

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY   DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2SM MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING  MONDAY, 8 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: International Women’s Day, Defence Minister Linda Reynolds  extending health leave; Christian Porter rape allegations.

MARCUS PAUL, HOST, MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING: Kristina  Keneally, good morning.

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR  GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY: Good morning Marcus, and good  morning to your listeners.

PAUL: Let's talk about International Women's Day, first and foremost, today. A  very important day for women around the world and in, in particular, in our back  of the, in our neck of the woods, Australia.

KENEALLY: Absolutely, and International Women's Day, it's where we  celebrate the social, economic and cultural contributions of women around the  world and here in Australia, but this year, Marcus, I gotta say, this contribution  feels particularly significant.

I mean, the past twelve months have been confronting for everyone. But  women have just shouldered such an enormous burden during this pandemic. I  mean, your listeners know that much of the frontline work has been done by  women in the caring professions, aged care, health care workers, cleaners,  teachers, childcare. All of these areas where women are predominant in these  professions in these workplaces, and where they have been at the forefront of  keeping us safe and keeping our community and our economy moving forward  during during these COVID lockdowns.



You know, men have made their contribution too, not to disparage that,  but you  know, quite frankly, we know that it's women who lost jobs more quickly than  men, we know that it is women who are in the lower paid professions, we know  that women put their lives at risk going out to work in these, as cleaners and  aged care workers.

It's just an extraordinary contribution we honour today.

PAUL: Alright, now we know a little later today Anthony Albanese, the boss, will  outline plans to reduce the gap between the average income earned by women  and men, which the federal government figures show remains at some 13.4%.  Essentially, as well, and importantly, the party will legislate an employee's right  to access 10 days of paid family and domestic violence leave.

KENEALLY: These are really important moves. Just to give your listeners a  sense of what that 13 step pay gap is, it's about $240 a week. And what we're  seeking to do here is require employers of a certain size, to make transparent  what their gender pay gap is, and what they're doing to fix it.

Because quite frankly, Marcus, what gets measured gets done. And this is  really about making clear where the pay gap exists and what steps the private  sector are taking to fix that.

But when it comes to domestic violence leave, I mean, the great tragedy for  Australia is that we are still seeing one woman a week, on average, killed by a  domestic partner. And we are seeing domestic violence rates are far too high.  Every person deserves to be safe in their own home. And, you know, when we  have barriers for women to be able to leave domestic violence, and one of  those is around their access to leave. If you are unable to leave, because you  are unable to access shelter, because you are unable to make arrangements  for your children, and because, if you don't have the capacity to take a few days  off work, to be able to organize those things - and I've seen this over and over  in my time as an MP where women are just trapped, and they just need that  little bit of breathing space to be able to make the arrangements and to get out.

PAUL: The Federal Government again today will launch the next phase of its  anti-domestic violence campaign, we're being urged to call out disrespect this  new ad campaign, which is very important. What do you make of this?

KENEALLY: Well, I think about what Malcolm Turnbull often said that not every  act of disrespect of women ends in violence, but every act of violence against  women begins with disrespect. And it's important that we are talking particularly  after the headlines we've had the past few weeks about the importance of  respecting women in Australia.



But I gotta say, wherever I go in past few weeks, Marcus, I run into women who  just feel exhausted, infuriated, depressed, angry, triggered by their own  memories of sexual harassment or assault for the memories of a friend or a  sister that they've helped through something like that. You know, this has been  a really tough few weeks to women and my message to women across  Australia is that, you know, I hear you, so many of us in the Federal Parliament  hear you and we in the Labor side are not going to stop speaking up about  fixing the culture in the Parliament and the culture in Australia. You know  respect, it begins with respecting women, but it certainly doesn't end there.

There's so much more Marcus we need to do. If we think about the economic  recovery, if we think about coming out of COVID. If we think about the situation  of women in Australia, you know, we know that right now there's an Industrial  Relations Bill that's going to make it easier to sack people and cut wages and  who does that hurt? Women in low paid jobs. We know...

PAUL: Mostly

KENEALLY: Yes. We know that this government just abolished the Family  Court because they did do a deal with One Nation extremists. And that's going  to hurt women and children, particularly going through a Family Court. This is  what we're faced with right now from from this Liberal Government. Lower  wages, less security for women and less safety in the legal system.

And we've got to fix that. And it starts with things like paid domestic violence  leave, more affordable childcare, investing in in supporting job security for low  paid and vulnerable workers. There's just so much here, we need to do beyond  an advertising campaign from the Prime Minister from marketing.

PAUL: All right now, just briefly, Kristina, before I let you go, under pressure,  Defence Minister, Linda Reynolds has extended her sick leave by a month on  the advice of her doctors. Now with respect to that, obviously, we we are  concerned and wish her well. But do you honestly believe that this Minister  should return to her role?

KENEALLY: Yeah, I agree with you. I wish Linda Reynolds well, and I hope  that she does have the opportunity to return to health. But I have to say I don't  see a pathway for her to return to be the Defence Minister.

Defence is in, was in a perilous difficult state before this, before Brittany Higgins  courageously came forward with her allegations of a rape that occurred to her  in the Minister's office on the Minister's couch.

You know, we have a Defence Department that is struggling to respond to the

Brereton Inquiry, that is struggling to manage the new submarines project, and  now we have a Defence Minister who is apparently not capable of turning up to  Parliament to answer questions, either in question time or in estimate.

PAUL: It's not good enough.

KENEALLY: It's not good enough and frankly, you know, the Minister called  Brittany Higgins a "lying cow." Now there has to be a consequence for that.  There has to be a demonstration that that is a completely inappropriate thing to  do. And let's be clear - it's the, the most frustration in my mind with this situation  is that Linda Reynolds stands up in the Parliament and proclaims that she  supports Brittany Higgins, that she always respected Brittany Higgins, that she  always backed Brittany Higgins, but then she goes into her office and behind  closed doors calls her "lying cow."

Linda Reynolds throughout this Brittany Higgins saga has demonstrated that  she did not, she did not display good judgment, and is not on top of this.

PAUL: And now she's missing in action as well. And it's not good enough. And  she's not the only one. The Attorney General Christian Porter is gone as well.  And yet, the Prime Minister just seems to think that it's business as usual, and  isn't you know, how good's Australia, and everything's all jingoism and  marketing and spin and we're not even worried about anything. Oh, come on.

KENEALLY: Can I can I just say on International Women's Day? What are the  women of Australia supposed to do? If Christian Porter returns to work, and  there's no independent inquiry, there's no examination of these serious  allegations that have been levelled against them.

We know right now that the Prime Minister and Christian Porter have not even  read the dossier with these significant allegations. We know that the woman,  who is now dead, her family wants this, these claims to be investigated. And we  have a prime minister who is just shrugging his shoulders. I mean, what are the  women in Australia meant to do when Christian Porter returns to work? Go,  "oh, well, then that's okay? This is all just fine, and we'll pretend none of that  happened?"

If you want to talk about respecting women, Prime Minister Morrison,  understand that the women of Australia are angry and upset and frustrated and  depressed by the situation that we have seen unfolding in the centre of this  Government over the past few weeks. These allegations deserve to be taken  seriously. And in workplaces right across Australia we have independent  investigations all the time into allegations like these, don't tell me if this wasn't a  Fortune, if this wasn't a big ASX company in Australia that we wouldn't have -  and the CEO has been accused of such things - there wouldn't be an



independent investigation ordered by the Board. Of course there would be.  Why should it be any different for Christian Porter?

PAUL: Alright, Kristina, thank you for coming on. Enjoy your day. We'll talk  again next week.

KENEALLY: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY BRADLOW 0427 280 390



