TRANSCRIPT

Tuesday, 2 February 2021

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan interview with Stewart  Brash, ABC Alice Springs Breakfast

SUBJECTS: ‘Holiday Here This Year’ tourism campaign, Support for the  tourism sector, JobKeeper

Stewart Brash: Dan Tehan is Federal Minister for Tourism. Dan Tehan, good morning.

Dan Tehan: Good morning, great to be with you.

Brash: And, Dan Tehan, we heard there from Patrick Bedford and he was saying that, you  know, the big problem for tourism is the fact that people are wary of booking ahead. They  don’t know what’s going to happen. We’ve already seen it with Western Australia last week  that people do not have the confidence. So, what difference will five million dollars in  marketing do?

Tehan: Well, we’ve got to make sure that we’re encouraging all Australians to take a holiday  here this year, and that’s what the five million dollar campaign is all about. And, it is, it’s  being done in a way where state and territory governments can also link in on the campaign.  So we see this as Federal Government leadership in the domestic tourism space, which is  normally where states and territories do the marketing …

Brash: … But, do you admit that there’s a lot of, let’s say, reticence of people to actually  book a holiday, given what we’re seeing with the borders, and we’ve seen it all the way  through summer?

Tehan: Yeah. Look, there is no doubt that if we could get a consistent approach from state  and territory governments to border closures and to hotspot definitions, than that would give  a lot more clarity to the tourism sector — and that’s something that we’ve asked of states  and territories to consider. I’ve started meeting with state and territory tourism ministers, and  my request of them is to try and work to get a uniform approach but, ultimately, in the end,  that will be up to state and territory governments. But, we will keep asking them to do that  because we think the more certainty that can be provided in that regard the better for our  domestic tourism industry. And, you have to remember, well over 650,000 people are  employed in the tourism industry in Australia. So, that will help them continue to have a job,  and that’s incredibly important and not only that, it’s the income that’s earnt, as well. And,  you know, with the Northern Territory, you know, it’s a billion-dollar industry in the Northern  Territory, or over a billion-dollar industry in the Northern Territory tourism — so, we’ve got to  be doing what we can to support the industry. And, that’s why domestic tourism, while our  international borders are closed, is just so vital for the whole of the sector.

Brash: Would it be fair to say that places like Central Australia, Far North Queensland, who  rely, and - certainly in Central Australia say a third of our market, would be internationals -  so, there is no way that domestic tourism is going to be able to make up the shortfall in  Central Australia and the Northern Territory?

Tehan: So, obviously, those regions which are more heavily reliant on international tourism  are the ones that we’re looking to see how we can support — and some of the measures  we’ve already been put in place have been targeted to do that. So, we will continue to keep  assessing that. If we can get domestic tourism up and operating, there are billions of dollars  that Australians spend on overseas holidays and overseas trips each year and if we could at

least capture 50, 60, 70 per cent of that, it will make a big difference. And, that’s what we’re,  that’s what we’re trying to do and we’ll continue to push, especially this year. And, our hope  is that we’ll start to see international tourism up and operating again by early next year, and  we’ll start planning for what we’re doing and how we’re marketing to get the international  tourism sector up and operating in the beginning of next year.

Brash: We’re speaking to Dan Tehan, the Federal Tourism Minister. Now, you heard there  from Patrick Bedford. Now, he’s a local tourism operator. We’ve been speaking to Patrick  and other operators ever since, all the way through the last 10 months, when they’ve been  doing it incredibly tough. Now, businesses locally are dreading the end of JobKeeper. Why  can’t Government make an exception for tourism in places like Central Australia, where we  don’t have an intra-territory market, we rely on interstaters and internationals to drive our  tourism? Is there not an argument to be made to allow JobKeeper to be extended to a place  like the Northern Territory?

Tehan: Well, the Government made clear that JobKeeper was a temporary measure that  was designed to address, basically, the forced shutdown of the economy due to the  pandemic. Now, as the economy has recovered and as we’ve come out of the pandemic  we’ve said that JobKeeper would end. But, what we are in consultations with the tourism  sector about is to see what specific and targeted measures we could put in place for the  tourism sector, and I’ve been having …

Brash: … What sort of measures are you thinking of, Minister?

Tehan: Well, we’re still in consultation with the sector on this. We’re also getting data from  Treasury and from Austrade, literally as we speak, and officials are looking at that data  because making sure that we can distinguish between those regions where we have seen a  strong rebound in domestic tourism versus those areas that have been impacted still by the  lack of international tourists. We’re looking at all that data at the moment, and then we’ll be  making decisions as a Government on what sort of targeted support will be required going  forward for the tourism industry — so that’s under active consideration at the moment.

Brash: But, would you possibly extend something like JobKeeper in those regions you’re  talking about, like it may be Far North Queensland, places like the Northern Territory?

Tehan: So, the Government’s been very clear that JobKeeper will end at the end of March  but what we’re doing is looking at additional support measures for sectors such as the  tourism industry, which are still being impacted by the close of the Australian border. And,  so, we will have more to say on that in the coming weeks but that’s under active  consideration at the moment.

Brash: We have people in business, people in tourism businesses tuned in this morning, as  they do, wondering, well, Minister, what are we going to do? We can’t survive another  month, two months, three months. What promise can you make to those businesses?

Tehan: Well, JobKeeper ends at the end of March. And, what we’re doing is we’re working  with the sector at the moment, consulting with the sector, to see what specific targeted  measures need to be put in place post-JobKeeper. And, I say to all those businesses, I was  appointed on the Tuesday before Christmas, I had meetings with the sector before  Christmas, between Christmas and New Year, and have continued to have those  discussions in January so, it is under active consideration. It’s been a number one priority of  mine since I’ve been given this portfolio and we will continue to have those consultations and  we will make decisions which we think are in the best interests of the tourism industry. And,

we know how important it is and we know that those 660,000 jobs are important to the  national economy.

Brash: But, do you accept, Minister, that without further support, that industries like tourism  in Central Australia will suffer, will lose jobs, and will lose companies?

Tehan: So, I’m well aware that the impact that the COVID-19 has had on the tourism sector,  and it continues to have on the tourism sector, especially with these snap border closures  that we’re still seeing and the uncertainty that that is creating for people wishing to take  holidays or wishing to take travel. It’s why we’ve put a five million dollar marketing campaign  in place, and we’ll continue to do more …

Brash: … But, do you think it’s inevitable we’re going to lose companies and jobs?

Tehan: Well, look, the pandemic has obviously had a big impact on us as a nation. I think it’s  been quite remarkable how we’ve come through it. I think the support that the community  has given to businesses that have been impacted has been extraordinary. I think the way the  Government has stepped in to support the business community and the community more  generally has been unprecedented in this nation’s history. So, we want to be doing  everything we can to help and support businesses through this pandemic and that’s the  approach that we will continue to take.

Brash: Minister, must leave it there. But, thank you.

Tehan: No, thank you.

Brash: Minister Dan Tehan, our Minister for Tourism, making no promises regarding the  future. Well, essentially saying there will be no JobKeeper after March but looking at  targeted support for the industry.

