

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS

MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO PILBARA BREAKFAST

TUESDAY, 30 MARCH 2021



SUBJECT: Australia Post delays in the Pilbara.



KELLY GUDGEON, HOST: I want to revisit the issue of delays with your post with Australia

Post. Over the past month, so many people in the community have raised the issue that they

are experiencing delays and loss of items being sent through the mail. You’ve heard from

Australia Post recently that COVID, bushfires, floods and train derailments are the reasons for

the delays, but as a community, you’ve said you’re dissatisfied with these explanations. I have

approached the Federal Minister for Communications who said it was an operational issue for

Australia Post and he wouldn’t be commenting, and yesterday, I spoke to the Opposition

Shadow Minister for Communications, Michelle Rowland. Here’s what she had to say:



Michelle, thank you for coming on the programme and I appreciate you taking the time to

speak on this issue on ABC Pilbara.



MICHELLE ROWLAND, SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS: Thank you very

much for having me.



GUDGEON: The issue we are talking about is Australia Post, and it’s an issue that the

community is getting increasingly angry about with delays to post and what they see as

excuses from the Government and Australia Post as to why things aren’t improving. We have

experiences where people are waiting days, weeks, and sometimes months, for parcels to turn

up, and often have been told that things have been lost. Businesses have been struggling to

get stock - obviously, in the Pilbara, we are a remote community and we rely on Australia Post

for many things. What is your reaction to that?



ROWLAND: It appears to me the complaints, and the levels and scope of them, doesn’t look

like this is an isolated issue. It looks like there is a far more systemic problem. I think

ultimately, we need to get the facts on the table so that we’ve got some transparency for local

residents and small businesses. The central question is: what is the service level the residents

and businesses of the Pilbara region should be receiving, and what have they actually been

getting? If there’s a gap between the two, then someone should explain why. As I said, there

should be transparency here. People understand that sometimes things go wrong, but the level

of service disruption appears to be on the face of it something that’s a systemic issue that

needs to be addressed.



GUDGEON: I spoke with Australia Post a few weeks ago now and they said there are a few

things that are impacting service, things like COVID, bushfires, floods, train derailments. On

the face of it, these things are issues and could hold the post up, but these are issues that

have been experienced since before Christmas. There are still people waiting for Christmas

presents to be delivered.



ROWLAND: Well, clearly these are issues that happen all the time in a remote area, and

again, I think people understand sometimes things go wrong. But when you get this level of

unacceptable service quality, then it really is incumbent on Australia Post, and it’s incumbent

on the Minister, to examine the issues going on, and let people know that they are looking into

it and they’re taking it seriously. Unfortunately, the Government and Australia Post have got

form in this area. Last year, they changed regulations to try and reduce services and cut jobs

at Australia Post under the guise of COVID and that was an excuse to implement a plan they

developed well before the pandemic came along. I’m really disappointed that this is the type of

explanation that residents and small businesses have received so far, and they have every

right to be upset about it.



GUDGEON: So what can be done then? I mean, obviously people raise complaints

individually, but what can we as a community can do?





ROWLAND: Firstly, I think this needs to be escalated to the highest political levels and I know

that Kevin Michel has made formal representations to the Minister for Communications, but I

don’t know whether a response has been forthcoming there. I’m aware that the local Federal

Member has been approached as well. But I think that this is going to take a lot of pressure on

the Government because it appears that Australia Post is content to offer up any number of

excuses. I think it also requires people who are familiar with these issues to speak out about it,

which is why I’m very prepared to lend my voice to this because when you live in remote parts

of Australia, it shouldn’t matter what your status is or what kind of parcel or what kind of letter

you’re waiting for, Australia Post is there to serve the whole community on an equitable basis.

I’m very prepared to continue raising this with Australia Post and following its process.



GUDGEON: Michelle, I think that many people here in the community would appreciate that

help in approaching the Minister because as I said before, the community sentiment on this is

one of frustration and anger.



ROWLAND: That can certainly be appreciated. Many things have changed because of

COVID, but I think that one thing that’s not going to go back to normal, especially if you’re in

regional and remote areas, is the reliance on e-commerce. It needs to be a gotten right,

regardless of where you live in Australia.



GUDGEON: Michelle Rowland, Shadow Minister for Communications, thank you for your time.



ROWLAND: My pleasure and I hope we can get some improvement in this area.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM BOIDIN 0406 009 019



