





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

11 April 2021

Supporting Australian Screen Production

In a major boost to Australia’s film and television industry, the Morrison Government will extend  two measures that will support the continued production of quality, local screen content as the  sector recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic.

The highly effective $50 million Temporary Interruption Fund (TIF) will be extended for a further  six months, to provide coverage for productions that commence principal photography prior to  31 December 2021.

The Morrison Government will also retain at 40 per cent the Producer Offset rate for feature films  with a theatrical release. In addition, as announced last year, the Government will raise the Producer  Offset rate from 20 to 30 per cent for other eligible formats such as drama and documentary content  for television and streaming platforms.

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, The Hon Paul Fletcher MP,  said these support measures would enable the local screen industry to continue to create quality  Australian productions and keep thousands of jobs and businesses in the local production sector.

“Despite our successes in managing COVID-19 in Australia, the continuing severity of the  pandemic internationally is a problem for screen production, with insurers still not providing  coverage for COVID-19 related events,” Minister Fletcher said.

“TIF has been vital in providing the certainty that productions need to secure financing, and it will  have assisted with more than 12,000 production roles and 5000 business contracts in its first year of  operation.”

The 40 per cent Producer Offset supports around 50 Australian feature films per year with total  average rebates of around $124 million. This injects over $300 million per year into the Australian  economy, and underpins the tremendous success Australian feature films have had at the box office  in recent times.

Minister Fletcher said, “Australian feature films play an important role in our cultural identity and  resonate strongly with audiences at home and abroad.  After consulting with Australian feature film

producers and considering the feature film environment abroad, we have determined that retaining  the offset at 40 per cent is appropriate to ensure the ongoing vitality of the sector.”

TIF and the Producer Offset are administered by Screen Australia. Eligibility criteria, guidelines  and how to apply are available at: https://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/funding-and-support

Media contact:  Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.Salusinszky@communications.gov.au

