

ANIKA WELLS

MEMBER FOR LILLEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING

THURSDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Australian Open; Regional quarantine; JobSeeker increase; Collingwood

Football Club racism.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Time now for my panel with Liberal MP Trent Zimmerman and

Labor MP Anika Wells. Welcome to both of you.



TRENT ZIMMERMAN, MEMBER FOR NORTH SYDNEY: Good afternoon



ANIKA WELLS, MEMBER FOR LILLEY: Good afternoon



KARVELAS: Look, let’s start with the Australian Open. Anika Wells, the Tennis Australia CEO

says he’s absolutely confident that the Australian Open will go ahead on Monday despite the

quarantine hotel breach that we’ve seen. Should the tournament go ahead, given you know

what we’re seeing here, which is a leakage out of this. Is it really realistic?



WELLS: Look, no one’s calling my office in distress about whether or not the Australian Open

is going ahead Patricia but people are calling about their loved ones trapped overseas. So, my

focus, and I wish that the focus of the Federal Government would be on getting those people

home as quickly as possible. But I guess, I think you were talking to one of your guests earlier,

if it was the fact that the Victorian government made a balanced decision on risk, because of

the benefits to the local economy then I also want to see that kind of enthusiasm being pushed

towards the Queensland economy. We’re still waiting on a package for the tourism and

aviation sectors from the Federal Government to help those sectors through beyond March.



KARVELAS: Trent Zimmerman, on that issue and the problem that caused it in the first place

- a breach of hotel quarantine. We’ve had this now across the country right? And clearly it’s a

virulent strain, it’s really concerning, people have done the hard work. Are we getting to the

point where we need national standards for hotel quarantine. And shouldn’t the Federal

Government be doing more of the heavy lifting on this?



ZIMMERMAN: Ah well, a couple of points in response to that. So firstly, we’ve had something

like 210,000 people go through hotel quarantine since the pandemic started. And the number

of issues that we’ve seen, has relative to those numbers been very small. Obviously we saw

significant problems early on in Victoria but I think that all of the states have been learning the

lessons as the pandemic’s proceeded. And at the moment they are tackling more virulent

strains. And so therefore, we have seen a significant tightening of the conditions in which hotel

quarantine is being operated. National Cabinet has been considering this, will consider it again

tomorrow. But as we’ve seen the more virulent strains start to arrive, those restrictions I

suppose on the hotel quarantine system, or the rigours of the hotel quarantine system, have

actually been improved. In relation to the Commonwealth’s role, we are providing significant

support to the States for the quarantine system which was established as a National Cabinet

agreement. And so you’ve had something like 1500 Defence personnel for example involved in

the process. We are helping coordinate the advice that’s been given to the States. And of

course, we’ve spent something like a quarter of a billion dollars just on the one facility that we

are operating with the Northern Territory Government at Howard Springs, which is being

ramped up to take additional people as we speak. So I think the hotel quarantine system is

fundamentally sound. Obviously every time there is an episode like this there are new

learnings. We’re still learning after all, about this virus.



KARVELAS: That’s right, and what we’re learning is also potentially about airborne

transmission which makes it a really risky proposition. Doesn’t that mean we should be actively

considering these options? You know the Prime Minister mentioned he might look at

Toowoomba, but more of these options for regional quarantining.



ZIMMERMAN: Yeah I think that the regional options do need to be explored. But it’s also

important to recognise the limitation of these approaches because the hotel quarantine system

is not just about having somewhere where people can rest their head, it’s actually having

facilities where they can be isolated, have their own bathrooms. But even more critically you

have to have a massive health and security police workforce that’s able to service them.

Because there are literally thousands of health and police service members that are supporting

what the states are doing across the country. And that’s not always practical in local

communities. And the other point I’d make is that a big focus of what the States and the

Commonwealth and the Territories have been doing over the last 12 months is to try and

protect regional and remote communities. And I think that there’d be some resistance from

those communities, as we saw in Gladstone, to hosting major quarantine facilities. Because

quite rightly there is a concern that if there was a leakage they could very quickly overwhelm

regional health facilities.



KARVELAS: Anika Wells, that’s an interesting point made by Trent Zimmerman that, you

know, there is a regional concern. Do you think that’s a really, er, that exists? That people in

those regional areas don’t want to see quarantining there?



WELLS: But isn’t that the same risk that we currently have in our city centres where we have a

high density of people?  We’re seeing this hotel quarantine system be consistently fallible and

they are in our city centres. That’s why things like Howard Springs are a good measure and

one I hope the National Cabinet considers tomorrow. But I am interested by Trent listing off all

these things the Commonwealth has done for quarantine. Does he admit then that quarantine

is a Morrison Government responsibility under the Constitution or not?



ZIMMERMAN: Well the key point I think is recognising that when National Cabinet first sat

down for this pandemic, it practically looked at how levels of government could assist-manage

the pandemic. And because of the fact that the Commonwealth doesn’t employ a large

grassroots police force. It doesn’t have the health workers. The States readily accepted the

fact that they would manage the quarantine system. And that is the type of practical approach

that we’ve seen. Unusually the last couple of months we’ve seen Labor become black-letter

constitutional lawyers. But if you went down the path that they’re trying to to make their political

point, then you wouldn’t see the Commonwealth doing a whole lot of the things that it’s doing

in health. Because health is a State constitutional responsibility. So we would have, using

Labor’s approach, left it up to the states to secure the facilities for ICUs, that they’d be securing

the vaccines, running those. It’s a crazy argument they’re pursuing.



KARVELAS: Let me just poke my nose in. You said, very clearly that the regional options

need to be pursued. So do you think that should be beyond Toowoomba?



ZIMMERMAN: I think that what the States and the Commonwealth need to do is to look at

what is feasible, recognising that we don’t have idly lying around, massive facilities that can

house the thousands of people that are returning to Australia each week. Because as I said,

I’ve had people say to me ‘why can’t you use Defence force facilities?’ The reality is that they

do not provide separated accommodation where you can contain an individual with their own

bathroom, because most of them have communal facilities. Often they’re barracks where in

fact you might have lots of people sharing the same space, and certainly sharing bathrooms,

sharing dining facilities. So there are limitations on that. But if there are facilities available for

example, in a place like Toowoomba which is close to Brisbane, is close to major health

services, has excellent health services of itself then yeah certainly we can be considering

those.



KARVELAS: Ok, just moving on to a couple of other issues - the Reserve Bank Governor said

that the JobSeeker payment shouldn’t go back to its pre-COVID levels. I know you have been,

both actually have been on the record - you both have said you think that it should go up.

What did you make of his intervention yesterday Anika?



WELLS: Loved it! Big fan! Hope he does it again. I think, as you said, I spoke in parliament a

year ago about what was then NewStart rate needing to go up. And I think what is interesting

now is that we’ve got a year’s worth of evidence about what happens when it does. Because

the government has had a $550 per fortnight supplement, a $250 per fortnight supplement, a

$150 per fortnight supplement. Now they can see, they’ve got data about how that impacts our

local economies. Because I know when people talk to me about it what they say is the

difference was they could get their car fixed, or they could actually go to the dentist or they

could buy new school shoes. And all of those things helps our local grocers, or our local

mechanics, or local retailers. So I think this is a good opportunity for us to raise the rate

permanently and to use that fresh data to decide exactly what the rate is.



KARVELAS: Trent Zimmerman, you’ve been on the record on this program about the

JobSeeker, was called NewStart in the past. Do you agree with the RBA Governor?



ZIMMERMAN: Well, I’ve been entirely consistent on this and I thought his contribution was a

very worthwhile one and supports the position that I’ve outlined on your program before.



KARVELAS: That I’ve outlined on your program before. Help me out. What is that position

today? What do you think should happen?



ZIMMERMAN: Well, as I have said before, I think that the JobSeeker rate shouldn’t return to

the pre-pandemic level. I think that there is a strong case for having a higher rate. Now that’s

obviously something the government’s going to be considering as we head towards the end of

March. But I think the point that the RBA Governor made, firstly on the economic front about

the potential stimulatory effect was an important one. But I think he also made a broader point

about our societal obligations to support those that can’t find work. It’s obviously a very difficult

balancing act because you need to set it at a level that doesn’t act as a deterrent for people

trying to find work but at the same time you need to set it at a level where people can have a

decent life when they can’t get a job quite legitimately. So I think the RBA Governor actually

gave an excellent address yesterday. He highlighted this obviously but I think also just as

importantly he highlighted the extraordinary success of our efforts not just on the health front

but on the economic front to protect Australians. And there was some really positive news

about the fact that we’re likely to return an economy the size that it was pre-pandemic by the

middle of the year, something like 12 months to 18 months before what they initially estimated.

So I think looking at the speech in its totality there’s lots of important messages in it.



KARVELAS: Look just to some breaking news, and very significant news I think. The players

at the Collingwood Football Club have penned a letter apologising for their part in allowing a

culture of systemic racism to develop at the club. Now the letter is attributed to the 150

footballers and netballers of Collingwood. It starts with the word sorry. And goes on to say

players feel responsible for these injustices because they have stayed quiet when they should

have spoken up. It’s a pretty significant contribution, that number of players making this point.

Anika, I’d just love to get your reflections on the kind of responsibility of players there, speaking

out, doing this. And whether you think Eddie Maguire’s position is sustainable in the long term.



WELLS: Well wow, you’re breaking news to me. That’s an incredible and really impressive

thing for those people to do. Particularly when you consider what kind of ramifications others

sporting codes have had - you know the NFL in America. The consequences faced by some

players for taking a stand on these issues over there, is very brave of them to come forward

and do it. So congratulations to everybody involved. As for Eddie Maguire, what’s it going to



take? What’s it going to take for him to go? He really is done. I can think of three or four

occasions now where he’s really overstepped the mark and continues to stay on. He was

Chairman of the Board. He is absolutely the number one person responsible for these things,

and it’s time for him to go.



KARVELAS: Trent Zimmerman?



ZIMMERMAN: Asking me about AFL is not my strong suit.



KARVELAS: As I always explain that it’s the political, the socio-political element I’m asking

after.



ZIMMERMAN: I know, but Eddie Maguire to me presents a game show on a rival channel. So

that’s about the extent of my knowledge of his career.  But look, I think if the players have done

that, like Anika I haven’t seen the news of this, but I think it’s a very positive thing if the players

are taking matters into their own hands to some degree and sending a very strong message.

And I do know, from the limited amount that I do know, that we’ve obviously seen some quite

dramatic demonstrations, notably from a former Australian of the Year the problems that

players have played, but also the positive role that they can play in educating the community.



KARVELAS: Thanks to both of you for joining me on the panel. You’ll be back again, so you

know, we’ll park it and continue it again next time you’re on. See ya.



ZIMMERMAN: Thanks PK.



WELLS: See you soon.



KARVELAS: Liberal MP Trent Zimmerman and Labor MP Anika Wells.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: CATHERINE PALMER 0424 823 424



