The Hon Paul Fletcher MP Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

Badgally Road upgrade complete Traffic along Badgally Road is flowing smoothly after a $5.76 million upgrade to widen the major arterial road from two to four lanes was completed.

The project widened 1.3 kilometres of road between Eagle Vale Drive and North Steyne Road, Campbelltown, and installed two sets of traffic lights at Clydesdale Drive and North Steyne Road.

Federal Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said the newly improved stretch of road is welcome news for local motorists.

“Upgrading Badgally Road will better connect Western Sydney residents with local jobs and services like health and education,” Minister Fletcher said.

“This forms part of our Western Sydney Infrastructure Plan - a $4.4 billion road investment to create thousands of local jobs, cut travel times, bolster road safety and secure a stronger, more connected region by delivering key links to the CBD, Western Sydney International (Nancy-Bird Walton) Airport and the Aerotropolis.”

Liberal Senator for New South Wales, Senator the Hon Marise Payne, who launched the project in December 2018 alongside Campbelltown City Council Mayor, Cr George Brticevic, said the Morrison Government is delivering the critical infrastructure needed to help address the growth of south-west Sydney.

“Badgally provides a future-proofed link through the heart of the Macarthur region into the southern gateway of the Aerotropolis, enhancing access to the opportunities flowing from Sydney’s emerging third city,” Senator Payne said.

“The completion of this important project joins recent regional milestones, such as the Western Sydney International (Nancy-Bird Walton) Airport earthworks reaching a halfway point.

Date received: 6 April 2021

“Our infrastructure pipeline is supporting local jobs, which is a critical part of our Economic Recovery Plan from the COVID-19 pandemic.”

Cr George Brticevic said the widened Badgally Rd will ease traffic congestion in the area in the long term and improve safety for students at the nearby Blairmount Public School.

“Badgally Road is a major arterial route connecting residents in Campbelltown and the Macarthur region to important services and business centres,” Cr Brticevic said.

“The new traffic signals at Clydesdale Drive will ensure school children are able to cross safely during the busy school opening and closing hours in the mornings and afternoons.”

Works completed include:

Upgrade of the existing road between Eagle Vale Drive and North Steyne Road to four lanes

Kerb and gutter and central medians

Traffic signals at the intersection of Badgally Road with Clydesdale Drive and North Steyne Road

Landscaping

New shared pathways

LED street lights

Drainage

The project was fully funded by the Australian Government under the Western Sydney Infrastructure Plan, which is delivering major road infrastructure upgrades to support population growth and access across the region.

Media contact:

Minister Fletcher: Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.Salusinszky@communications.gov.au Senator Payne: William Spence | 0438 206 222 | William.Spence@aph.gov.au

