

CLARE O’NEIL MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUSTRALIANS   AND AGED CARE SERVICES   FEDERAL MEMBER FOR HOTHAM



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC VICTORIA STATEWIDE DRIVE  MONDAY, 1 MARCH 2021

SUBJECT: Aged Care Royal Commission Final Report.

NICOLE CHVASTEK, HOST: Clare O’Neil is the Shadow Minister for Senior Australians and  Aged Care Services. Clare O'Neil, good afternoon.

CLARE O’NEIL, SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUSTRALIANS AND AGED CARE  SERVICES: Good afternoon, Nicole. Lovely to be with you.

CHVASTEK: What's your response to the report?

O’NEIL: Well, I think you used the word harrowing, just earlier, and that's certainly one that  comes to mind. I feel angry. I think, disgusted, in some ways, that things have gotten to this  point and frustrated because the Government has actually had almost 8 years in government  now to address some of these issues. Instead of doing what they were called to do by the 21  previous government reports that we've had into aged care in their time in office they cut  funding to the system and then are turning around acting surprised when standards have  fallen. I think it's a huge wake up call for government. To understand that there are so many  people in aged care who are not receiving the care that they deserve, in their older age, it  should be a shock. I hope this shakes the Government out of their complacency on this issue.

CHVASTEK: What's the most confronting component of this report?

O’NEIL: I think one of the things that I find deeply disturbing is the rates of malnourishment in  residential aged care. The report tells us that about two thirds of residents in residential aged  care, today, are either actually malnourished or are at risk of being malnourished. That just  tells us so much about this system, Nicole. It's one where we've got this amazing collection of  staff who are there for the right reasons, trying to do the right thing, but basically held back by  this system. You mentioned the $6 a day. We've got providers cutting costs wherever they can  because government is not funding them properly. The result is people are literally getting not  enough food to eat and that should not be happening in Australia.

CHVASTEK: You say that the Government is not funding them properly but there's also issues  with transparency, is there not? Where the providers, in fact, get funded rather well. The  money disappears. I mean, we saw some terrible examples during the coronavirus pandemic

of very rich owners of an aged care facility on their yacht in Greece. While back home their  aged care residents were dying and sick and suffering from inadequate infection control  procedures and were malnourished. So it's more than just the providers aren't getting enough  cash, it's also where is that cash going?

O’NEIL: I think you're absolutely right to point that out, Nicole, but I really think we need to  keep the focus here on the Government because, when we look at what has happened over  time, to what's going on in these aged care homes, 64% of residential aged care homes,  today, are running at a loss. So the idea that the picture of this aged care operator taking  flamboyant trips to Greece and the like - I absolutely accept that's happening in some quarters  - but in general, the problem here is a sector that's been brought to its knees by funding cuts  from government.

I agree transparency absolutely needs to be addressed, that’s core to fixing this problem, but,  the bottom line is, there is not enough money to go around and that is why people are losing  money hand over fist. Indeed, a lot of operators are considering leaving the sector altogether  because it's not possible for them to run an even operation with the government funding that's  coming through the door.

CHVASTEK: The Prime Minister said that this sector has been run down by a series of  governments, not just this government or the one before it. This is true, is it not, Clare O’Neil,  that the Gillard Rudd Government did nothing to turn this around?

O’NEIL: No, I completely reject that Nicole, actually. I feel very annoyed that there's this  attempt to avoid responsibility on the part of this almost 8 year old government. The first thing  to say is that when you've been in power for 8 years, it's time to start taking responsibility for  something. They've got this report. They've known for years about the problems. To put this  blame on other governments I think is just ridiculous and wrong.

But, secondly, I just point out that, actually, aged care reforms were one of the hallmark  achievements of the Gillard Government. Mark Butler, when he was Minister, put in place a  range of important reforms that, believe it or not, had the support of older Australians, of their  advocates, of providers of aged care, and of the workers in the sector. It was called the Living  Longer Living Better package. That was always intended to be the first instalment of a set of  reforms that would drive the change to what we really want here, which is a demand driven  system. That means that when you need services, they're there for you to get to.

Unfortunately, the Government sat around for 8 years, in the midst of a fast ageing population,  and cut funding from the sector instead of doing the reform project that's needed. I really think  people need to really push on this point about this idea of just smearing responsibility  everywhere. Scott Morrison is the Prime Minister, he has presided over cuts to aged care, and  now he wants us to trust him to fix the system and I just don't buy that.

CHVASTEK: Where do you think the solutions lie then? I mean, half a billion dollars, it's not to  be sneezed at.

O’NEIL: I know that sounds like an enormous sum of money but just to give you a sense of the  quantum of dollars here. In the 2017 Budget, the Morrison Government cut $1.2 billion in one  fell swoop. Now, they're telling us that they're doing a terrific job by putting a half a billion  dollars into the system. I expected a lot more coming out of this. I actually thought the  Government would take the Royal Commission aged care final report as a chance to do



something that's really going to shift the dial for older people living in care.

There are more than a million people receiving aged care services today. Unfortunately - even  though half a billion dollars probably sounds like a lot of money - when you compare it to the  something like $20 billion that we're spending a year, it's actually not going to make the  difference that we need. The numbers that have been talked about here to actually fix these  problems are multiples of that amount. So, I'm actually not too impressed with this short term  response from the Government. We are going to need to see something much more significant  in the Budget to actually fix the problems that have been created.

CHVASTEK: Clare O'Neil, thank you.

O’NEIL: Thanks, Nicole.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB KAHANE 0422 723 491



