

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN BREAKFAST

FRIDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2021



Subjects: Right wing populism, On Charlatans, climate change economic compact, draft

Code of Conduct.



STEVE CANNANE, HOST: Steve Cannane with you on RN Breakfast. Politics around the

world is being turned on its head and it's the fakes and the fraudsters who are winning. That's

the view of one of Australia's most senior opposition politicians. Chris Bowen is Labor's climate

change and energy spokesman. And he's just released a book called ‘On Charlatans’ as part

of Hachette’s ON series. In it he argues that voters in a range of countries are being sold false

remedies by populist politicians, and that this trend is preventing democracies from adequately

dealing with big issues, like climate change, and also rising inequality. Chris Bowen is with us

this morning, Chris, welcome back to Breakfast.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY: Thanks,

Steve. Good morning.



HOST: Who are these charlatans you're writing about and what in your view unites them?



BOWEN: Well, they're the right wing populists and it really starts in the aftermath of the global

financial crisis about 10 years ago. It was meant to be the social democratic moment when

people realised that sort of unrestrained capitalism had costs and people would turn to

progressive parties. And instead, it's been the right wing populist moment, whether it's Donald

Trump or Boris Johnson or Scott Morrison aided and abetted by Clive Palmer and Pauline

Hanson.



So what I did was have a look at what I thought were the four things which sort of bring that

right wing populist strain together. Very quickly, fundamental dishonesty to try and undermine

faith in political institutions, identity politics on steroids, so the politics of grievance,

weaponising climate change, fear and loathing of climate change, and hyper partisanship all

the time. They're the four things that I you know, in varying degrees think unite these right wing

populists, and the left has suffered, the progressive left has suffered. Far from being the social

democratic moment, we've been dealing with what's called Pasokification, which is sort of left

wing parties often just disappearing. I mean, the Labor Party hasn't won an election in too long,

but we are a viable political force, as opposed to say, the French socialists who no longer exist

in any effective way. And other political left wing political parties around the world who have

either really, really struggled or just ceased to exist. So it's trying to make sense of all of that.



HOST: Is it fair to put Scott Morrison in with those people who just referred to Donald Trump,

Viktor Orban, Erdogan in Turkey. I mean, is he really a right wing populist look at what he did

with say, for example, COVID? Very very different response to what was going on in the US or

in Hungary, those kind of countries?



BOWEN: I do recognise that in the book and recognise that they're not all exactly the same of

course. And say, for example, Boris Johnson is actually quite good on climate you know, he

doesn't subscribe to the right wing approach on climate change that Scott Morrison and others

do. And yes, I do recognise the response to COVID-19 has been very different in Australia,

partly as a result of our Federation, but it has been a different response to and I've fully

acknowledged that, including in my previous job as Shadow Health Minister. But nevertheless,

there are strains which bring them together, there is a playbook, which they implement in

different ways, but it does bring them together in one I think, pretty coherent approach to

politics, which is this right wing populist moment, which we really need to identify and take on

and tackle head on.



HOST: Okay, let's talk a bit more about a couple of the key ingredients that lead to the rise in

populists. Often they're responding to grievances, often genuine grievances from mostly

working class voters. And they tend, also, I think to fill up a political vacuum formed by the

failure of traditional parties who are either not listening, to the voters, or they've had scandals

themselves. Now, you cited the socialists in France, and under Alon he had a terrible last

election, I think, got about 7% of the vote.



BOWEN: The socialists certainly got absolutely trounced.



HOST: Exactly. And so that many see that is a failure of that government, how they dealt with

both unemployment and also the rise in Islamist terrorist attacks. In Hungary and Italy, you saw

scandals involving left wing parties, and also right wing parties in Italy, that created a political

vacuum that allowed the populists to charge through. Do you think Labor needs to take

responsibility in the Australian context for not listening to those voters with genuine

grievances?



BOWEN: Well, you're point about genuine grievances is 100%, right. Yes. And I do say that in

the book that we have. These are charlatans offering false remedies to real problems. And it's

job insecurity, it's increasing casualisation, it's increasing income inequality, it's people in

regional communities and outer suburbs doing it tough and seeing their communities suffer.



HOST: So that's true for you, isn't it?



BOWEN: Yeah, and these are all real and genuine and valid grievances. So in fact you know, I

quite agree with you. The key is to recognise that people are hurting. Again, going back to the

global financial crisis. People hurt. They didn't see around the world, particularly United States,

the people who caused that crisis, you know, pay any particular price, but they've paid the

price of, you know, long recessions, high income inequality, stagnant wages,  increasing

casualisation. And so what the right wing populist have done is quite, you know, cunningly

capitalised on that very genuine and valid concern, and used it for their political purposes. So,

the key is yes, one, recognising these grievances are valid and genuine in our regions in our

suburbs. And two, they need to be given a voice. Certainly, I think for Labor and parties like it,

that's our key role.





HOST: We're talking to Labor frontbencher, Chris Bowen, who's released his book called “On

Charlatans” as part of Hachette ‘ON’ series. Now you're Labor’s new climate change

spokesperson. And in the book, you argue that Labor can offer the Australian people a new

compact when it comes to those who feel they're being left behind by the loss of jobs in the

coal industry. What is that compact?



BOWEN: The compact is really about saying to Australians, who are concerned about the

future, whether it be climate change or other economic trends, but climate change is the most

acute, you are the centre of our thinking. You know, you're not a footnote, you're the centre of

our thinking. And we're going to invest in you as we tackle this challenge. And it draws on that

sort of Hawke/Keating idea of tackling the big economic changess that we are facing. They

faced, you know, declining national income, so they opened up the economy and engaged in

very difficult economic reforms. But they also created Medicare, universal superannuation,

lifted school retention rates, massive investments in universities and opening up opportunities.

So they brought the Australian people with them. Climate change, which is the key economic

challenge of our time, I think the challenge is one - to win the economic debate by pointing out

that actually, change is coming, we can ignore it, or we can embrace it. And we can create

jobs, we can invest in communities that are doing it tough. We can invest in communities that

have in many ways built out our economy that have provided the energy sources, and they're

well placed in this new world. Their the same places with access to the ports and the railways

and the pipelines and the big space for renewable energy investments. They need to be at the

center of our thinking.



HOST: I just want to briefly move on to another issue that's dominating politics at the moment

and then your former parliamentary colleague, this week, Emma Husar, wrote an open letter to

your leader Anthony Albanese in relation to Labor’s response to the handling of the Brittany

Higgins rape allegations in which she said I've been galled watching my former colleagues

speak out yet were silent bystanders when I enjoyed such horrendous treatment. The Labor

Party cannot pretend that poor treatment of women exists on only one side of the political

divide. Is Emma Husar right?



BOWEN: Well, look, the situation's are quite different. Firstly, let me say that, you know,

obviously, all of us in Parliament House have been shocked and concerned about the events

in the last fortnight, and how they've been handled. In relation to Emma, she obviously had a

very difficult time in Parliament. And if she doesn't feel that she was adequately supported, that

is deeply concerning.



HOST: Is she owed an apology by side of politics?





BOWEN: What the Labor Party were dealing with was a series of complaints from people who

worked for and with Emma, which needed to be managed. And that was a very difficult

situation for all involved. I understand Emma has a particular view about how that was

handled. But we were dealing with a range of complaints from people who worked with her and

for her, which did need to be handled very sincerely.



HOST: Just briefly Labor’s looking at a national draft Code of Conduct to deal with allegations

of bullying, sexual harassment and assault, it's going to the National Executive the party today,

would that have made a difference in her situation?



BOWEN: Well, it's part of a long running approach by Labor to try and deal with these issues.

We’ve recognised upfront that we are we are not perfect. There are cultural and institutional

issues which must be tackled over a long period of time. And this is an recent thing for us. It's

been an iterative process to improve at every opportunity and make sure that our staff, the

people who work with us and for us feel that they have the opportunity to raise concerns in a

very open and transparent way and not in any way feel pressured. And that's been you know,

obviously that's needed, tweaking and improvement as we've gone, and I've got no doubt I will

continue to do so. But we've, we've emphasised the need for independent processes for

people who feel the need to raise concerns to have arm's length investigations and ways for

them to tackle those issues and feel supported all the way through.



HOST: Chris Bowen. Thanks for coming in.



BOWEN: Great to talk to you Steve.



ENDS



MEDIA: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931





