SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY

CHAIR OF FIRST NATIONS CAUCUS COMMITTEE

SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS ON THE HOUR

MONDAY, 25 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECT: Australia Day.



GABRIELLA POWER, HOST: A new poll shows close to half of all Australia oppose changing

the date, but half believe it will shift within the next decade. Joining me live now is Malarndirri

McCarthy, Labor Senator for the Northern Territory. Do you believe the date should be

changed?



MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY: Gabriella, I'm of the view that what needs to change is attitudes.

It doesn't really matter what date we look at for Australia Day and the 26th of January is

important on many levels. But what needs to happen is a real understanding of all of the

stories of Australia. And that is in particular First Nations people. I think there in Sydney, you

have the early morning sunrise smoking ceremony and healing ceremony, which is a really

beautiful thing, and that acknowledges the many massacres and atrocities that occurred

towards First Nations people, but also acknowledges the unfinished business that we still have

to do to bring greater equality.



POWER: So there will be ceremonies held tomorrow. What else do you believe needs to be

changed on Australia Day? Are those ceremonies enough?



MCCARTHY: Look, I think it's really about attitudes. I'd just called on all Australians to

recognise that we have come a significant way just in this last 12 months in fighting together

against COVID-19 and the pandemic that has threatened all of the world in relation to the

survival of people. And we've seen the survival of our country. And yes, there have been

losses with COVID, and I know those families are still suffering. But then we look at what First

Nations people talk about with surviving within this country over the last couple of centuries. I

think we can learn from one another here that ultimately we need to still come together to

survive as a people of Australia.



POWER: Invasion day protests will be going ahead tomorrow. Do you believe this is the year

for it while we're still in a pandemic?



MCCARTHY: Oh, look, I think we are still a democracy, Gabriella. And that was, that's one of

the wonderful things about our country. And people should be able to do what they would like

to do as their democratic rights, but in a respectful way. I mean, everyone thinks differently

about the 26th of January. We've seen what Cricket Australia is going to do. We know there

are going to be Invasion Day rallies, Survival Day rallies, but also general barbecues with

people who are being sworn in as Australians for the first time. We can do all those things and

still hopefully do it in a respectful way.



POWER: The ABC has called Australia Day also Invasion Day in a Twitter post. Do you think

that was the right move?



MCCARTHY: Oh, that word Invasion Day is being used right across Twitter, whether it's the

ABC or other media outlets or individual groups. Again, as I said, people say the January 26th

either as any of those things as Invasion Day, Survival Day, Australia Day. Let's make sure it's

a day that we can all wake up the next day and move forward on.



POWER: A new report shows unemployment for Indigenous Australians living in regional and

very remote areas is 19 per cent, compared to just seven percent for non-indigenous people.

What more should be done to help close this gap?



MCCARTHY: Well, the Community Development Programme, the CDP, is a disgraceful

program that runs right across regional and remote Australia and that needs to be abolished

and reconsidered in terms of assisting those people who live in those areas. That's around

33,000 people on CDP, Gabriella. And I know that those figures of high unemployment are not

a surprise. They've been around for quite a while and the federal government needs to really

invest appropriately on the kind of work programmes that should be out there.



POWER: Malarndirri McCarthy, appreciate your time this morning.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARTHA TATTERSALL 0417 387 775

