

AMANDA RISHWORTH

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND  DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH  MEMBER FOR KINGSTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO ADELAIDE MORNINGS WITH DAVID BEVAN  TUESDAY, 19 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECT: Superannuation.

DAVID BEVAN, HOST: Thank you for both setting out time. In the next few  minutes I just wanted to ask you both to help us get our head around this  superannuation debate. Which I think is summed up by the question - do you  want the next increase, whenever that might be, now in your pocket, so you  could spend it, maybe put it aside for a house deposit or whatever, or do you  want it in your superannuation? Tony Pasin, what is the government position?  And when will this have to be decided?

TONY PASIN, LIBERAL MEMBER FOR BARKER: Well firstly, good morning  Amanda and happy new year to you. Well David, the current trajectory sees  super paid at a rate of 9.5 per cent. The slated increase of half of a percent is  scheduled to take place or begin on the first of July this year, that is 2021. And  the consideration will need to be made between now and then relative to the  economic circumstances we find ourselves in, in terms of what may or may not  occur in relation to that. And I think it's important to note that it is six months  away from that date and if 2020 taught us anything it taught us that we need to  remain flexible and agile because nothing is as certain as it used to be.

BEVAN: Okay so the Parliament, what you're saying is that increase of half a  percent, that increase is going to kick in in the middle of this year. If the  Parliament wants to do something about it, it’s got to have that debate. And the  options are what? That people get the half a percent increase, but it's in their  wage right now?

PASIN: I think the fairest way of explaining it is that if no action is taken, then

the increase occurs on the first of July. The issue being considered currently is  this - we're obviously in very difficult economic circumstances, and as the  governor of the Reserve Bank has made clear super increases are effectively a  trade off, and that trade off is against wage increases. So the challenge at the  moment, and there’s no money tree out the back of small businesses,  particularly not at the moment, but I'd say large businesses as well. And so the  question becomes one of, well, if we thrust this increase on the economy, on  employers, then what impact is that going to have on jobs? So we need to be  very careful about this, because the last thing we want in this very delicate  recovery is to create a circumstance which will put people's jobs at risk. And I  know others will say “oh well it's legislated” but these are very different times  than the times in which we set them, and indeed they’re very different times  from 12 months ago even.

BEVAN: So are you saying you could say to employees “no, you don't have to  give any increase, not for super and not in people's pockets”? You just don't  have to come up with that half a percent wage increase?

PASIN: I'm certainly not saying that. What I'm saying is that we need to  consider the circumstances very carefully over this period, this six month period  is a particularly delicate period. What I do know is if no action is taken, and that  may well be the outcome of deliberations, then we'll see half a percent increase  in super, which of course is your listeners’ money, but it's deferred, at least  access to it is deferred, until the age of 65 or 67. So there are a couple of  questions operating at the moment. Do we proceed with the status quo, but  equally, as you indicated in your introduction, is a more appropriate setting just  at the moment is allowing people to have access to that money now, rather than  deferred off into the future? Given that we are about creating that economic  activity and that stimulus here and now.

BEVAN: Amanda Rishworth, what do you think?

AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD  EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT: Well firstly I'd say that we've had this  super increase delayed many times over the last number of years. Tony Abbott  delayed it, it was delayed again. There always seems to be an excuse as to why  not to pay this superannuation increase. And we know that yes this is a difficult  economic time, but we will also face difficult times in the future if people are not  set up properly for retirement. If we’re saying there’s a choice - do you take it  now or do you take it later - we're actually saying what's the point of  superannuation? And the point of superannuation is very clear - if people have  money in their pockets now, they're likely to spend it, which means they're not  set up for retirement. We then have to tax more, because everyone will rely on  what many would say is an insufficient pension system. So, especially when

we've got an ageing population, this puts us in a very precarious, difficult time  into the future if we scrap our superannuation system and the compulsory  element of it.

BEVAN: It really sounds like there are three options, not the two that I first  stated. I said take it now, take the half percent increase in your pocket right  now, or put it in your super. Well the third option is we say that nobody's getting  half a percent increase, because it's just too tough for employers to find that  money. So there is a third option, you don't get anything.

RISHWORTH: That's right, and this has been discussed quite a lot. The third  option you identified has been the first issue that's really been argued, and that  is it's too tough economic times. And that's been argued on many occasions,  we've had this superannuation increase delayed now for over seven years and  there's always been the argument that this isn't the right time. Well that just  doesn't cut it when we're looking at long term support for workers to retire in a  comfortable way, not to be relying on the pension system, the public pension  system, and to actually retire with some dignity. So I don't think that's a very  good option. I think it is a modest amount that we're talking about, half a  percent. And I think we do need to, when we're in these circumstances, look at  the long term as well. If you look at what superannuation has done in terms of  acquiring that wealth for workers, it's also gone to prop the economy up. We've  seen that the capital investment made by superannuation has actually provided  a stimulus in difficult economic times, such as purchasing Australian assets like  ports. So I think we've got to not be too short sighted when it comes to this  debate, and actually look at the fact that this has been delayed, the delay hasn't  led to increasing wages, there's been stagnant wages growth. And I think we've  got to bite the bullet and actually say we need to continue this programme for  the long term because it has long term benefits for workers and the economy.

BEVAN: Tony Pasin, after nine o'clock we were talking about how uneven the  economy has been during the pandemic. Some people have actually made big  profits and are going gangbusters. If you're making masks what a great time to  be in business. And some retailers have done really well, while others have  struggled. And it's not clear how the next few months are actually going to be  panning out. What sort of a stimulus would it be, because we know wages are  so flat, if I go you did say you've got to come up with a half a percent increase,  and we put it in your pocket.

PASIN: You're right, David, and the economy is very patchy and if you look at  the residential home building market, it's going gangbusters. But like many  things that are operating in the economy at the moment, that's because of some  government stimulus, or at least it's being assisted along by government  stimulus. The point here is as that stimulus wanes, we don't know exactly how



the economy will react. So the point at which this decision should be made is  much closer than the first of July, that's the first thing to say when we've got a  better read. We've done so well during COVID because we've waited and got  the best evidence possible, as close as practical to the deadline for making the  decision. But in terms of this, let's be clear, wages have been flat. But if what we  do is we force a half a percent increase on employers, then I think it’s certain  wages today will continue to remain flat, because there just isn't enough  capacity at the moment, in my view, subject to what we see over the next three  to four months, to do both. So it really is a choice between one or the other. And  while we're talking about superannuation, I think this six months is a great  opportunity in light of the pandemic, in light of the difficulties, for us to have a  real think about where we sit in terms of this. And for example, and just floating  a proposal out there for your listeners, I think the hardship cases I see, and I'm  sure Amanda is the same, are people that don't own their own home. If they end  up on a pension, and own their own home, life is still difficult, but it's not so  difficult. I think one of the things we should allow people to do is access some  portion of their super to enable them into their first home, because I think that's  the best investment you can make for today and for the future.

BEVAN: Amanda Rishworth we're only a minute away from the 10 o'clock news,  but what do you think of that idea?

RISHWORTH: Look that’s been rejected many, many times, even by the Prime  Minister himself, because it doesn't do what universal super has been set up to  do and that is provide a comfortable retirement. And of course, the government  if they want to abolish compulsory superannuation and get people to spend it  before retirement, will need to outline their plan of how the smaller number of  taxpayers are going to cover the millions more pensions that will be required as  a result. That's a simple proposition. They can't kick this can down the road and  say “we'll deal with it when it comes”, because we know that the pension isn't  adequate for many people, and for many others relying on the pension is just  not good enough. And how will the country pay for it? That's the big question if  they want to dismantle the superannuation system.

BEVAN: Amanda Rishworth, thank you for your time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923





