

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 22nd March 2021

Minister Littleproud iv ABC RN with Fran Kelly

FRAN KELLY: The Federal Government has activated disaster relief payments as  thousands of people are being forced to flee rising flood-waters in western Sydney and on  the mid-north coast of New South Wales. The one in 50-year weather event has already  seen 1000 people evacuated from western Penrith, with another 4000 on standby to leave  the Hawksbury-Nepean Valley over coming days. And the worst could still be to come with  heavy rain forecast to fall over the next 48 hours. David Littleproud is the Federal Minister  for Emergency Management, he's in our Parliament House studios this morning. Minister,  welcome back to Breakfast.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me, Fran.

FRAN KELLY: Can we start with the disaster zones? What's the latest you've been  advised for the Hawksbury-Nepean flood zones, and some are downstream - Penrith,  Windsor, Richmond - all heavily populated? How are these communities faring?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Not well, and potentially could get a lot worse. We have to be  honest, the bureau's issued some pretty stark warnings this morning around further rainfall  as it comes through, through today; and that means that people need to be on alert.  There's around 2800 just in that Hawksbury, Hawksbury-Nepean area that have been  evacuated. But, potentially, if this gets to a situation where the bureau believes it  potentially could be, there could be over 54,000 residents that could be impacted and may  need to be evacuated.

Now, we're hoping we don't have to get to that, but that's the potential nature and scale of  this disaster that people need to understand, they need to be prepared for - and that  means they have to have their own plan in place and act as soon as emergency service  personnel ask them to. They need to, not only keep their families safe, but respect those  men and women who are putting their lives on the line for us - many of whom are  volunteers. So this is, potentially, quite a serious situation and, in fact, I was just advised,  walking in here, that the Kempsey CBD has been evacuated. So it's obviously right up and  down the coast of New South Wales, and now into southern Queensland. So, we'll  continue to work, not just in the immediate relief, but also supporting New South Wales  and Queensland Government's in addressing this emergency with whatever resources  they need.

FRAN KELLY: Potentially 54,000 having to eventuate[sic] - that's an incredibly alarming  scenario. What would need to happen with the rains for that to be- to come to fruition?

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

And, how- what's the Government doing to help prepare evacuation centres for that many  people? Or, are we not at that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well there's- Yeah, there are plans, strategies in place. Now,  we're hoping we don't get to that, but that's the potential nature, if the rain falls in particular  catchments. You've got to understand the catchments are soaked and further rains, and if  they're, if they're in those particular catchment areas then that can obviously bring flash  flooding and further water into these into these catchments that're just taking time to get  out. So, the reality is that's what we have to plan for. And that's why we're saying to  everyone in those areas, they need to plan now; they need to understand this is a very,  very serious situation, a dangerous situation that they are in; and, unless they understand  that and prepare for that, then they're putting their lives and their family's lives at risk.

FRAN KELLY: Up the coast, around Kempsey which, as you say, the CBD, you  understand, has been flooded or evacuated - flooded or evacuated?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Evacuated, Fran.

FRAN KELLY: Evacuated. All around that area is dairy and beef country, there's also a lot  of agriculture growing, a lot of vegetables growing. Is it too early to assess, for instance,  livestock losses?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It is. But those assessments will be made as soon as the water  abates. That's why we've just initiated initial payments to those people that have water  inundation, or had damage - there's $1000 per adult, $400per child; and for those that  have had income impacted, there's 13-weeks of income support at Austudy, ABSTUDY  levels - so that's this to ensure the support that the Federal Government's provided. But  New South Wales, obviously, will make assessments of the damage once the waters  abated, and we just need to allow them to do that in a safe way. So that'll come and that'll  be something that the Federal government will obviously support. And we expect also,  potentially, Queensland to make an application today or tomorrow as well, considering the  damage that was caused up there yesterday afternoon, last night.

FRAN KELLY: Okay. But those payments, $1000 for adults; $400 per child; and then,  potentially up to 13-weeks JobKeeper assistance. Who's eligible for that right now? Is it, is  it all areas in the mid-north coast? And the areas around the Hawkesbury, Nepean, the  Penrith, Richmond, those areas?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Exactly. There are 34 local government areas that have been  initiated, and from 8am this morning you can ring Centrelink - there's a designated line for  them so that we can work through those payments. And we're saying to people, please  don't self-assess, the best thing you can do is ring Centrelink, get through to them, and let  them support you, and make that assessment with you. But for those 34…

FRAN KELLY: Can you do it online?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yes, you can. In fact, there's an online portal as well. But  obviously, sometimes people would prefer to have access to, to another human being just  to work through this.

FRAN KELLY: Yes. Of course.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: This is a traumatic experience, and so we're just saying to people,  if you, if you want to have that face-to-face on- or over the phone experience of talking  through your circumstance, that's a lot more personal that is going to have someone that is  going to empathise and understand your situation, then just pick up the phone. It's just a  lot more personal.

FRAN KELLY: Okay. I'm sure people would be grateful for that money, but it's not much in  the scheme of things if you've lost everything. People are already lodging their insurance  claims in their thousands. Are you in contact with insurers to ensure their response is both  rapid, compassionate and fair? Do you have a message for insurers today?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, we do. But can I just say that that is our first support  payment - there'll be others as we get further assessments. So, yes, it is a small amount to  start with, but it's just to give them some dignity and respect in these trying times, and we'll  obviously ramp that up as further assessments are made.

But as for the Insurance Council, well, obviously will be in contact with them this morning  to make sure they understand their responsibilities, for them to make sure they cut the  cheque. Now, they can't be tricky on this; they can't play games; they simply have to be  honest with their, with their customers. This is a time when the spotlight is on them to  make sure they do the right thing. This is an opportunity for them to build some trust after  the royal commission; the insurance industry and financial industry have got an opportunity  to square the ledger and do the right thing here.

And I've got to say, the banks have already reached out and we've had contact with a  number of the big four about the support that they're already planning for those people that  have been impacted. So the banking sector themselves have been very forward leaning  on this, but we'd expect the Insurance Council to also make sure their members are just as  forward leaning and honest.

FRAN KELLY: The floods coincide with the start of the Phase 1b of the COVID vaccine  programme, that's for older Australians 70 and over; and, others too with chronic illness;  and, indigenous Australians over 55. Given the flooding we're seeing across a very wide  area of New South Wales, how badly disrupted will the roll-out be? And what steps have  you taken to try and make sure that those shots will be distributed without too much delay?  Or, is that not the immediate priority?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: That's not the immediate priority for those flooded areas. Keeping  people safe is the first priority above COVID just at the moment, we're doing that in a  COVID-safe way. And the fact that Australia has handled COVID better than anyone else  in the world means that we do have time on our side and we don't need to rush. There's  over a thousand GP clinics that have been given the vaccination to roll out today under 1b.

Obviously, those flood impacted areas, there'll be GP clinics that are closed right through  them, and rightfully so. We just cannot move people in a dangerous way in these  circumstances. This is a potentially very, very dangerous situation we're going into that  surpasses COVID-19. So once the floodwaters abate, we're able to get those GP clinics  up and going again, then we'll get the jabs moving. But there's no panic. There's no race.  This is about making sure we do it right. There's over 4000 GP clinics that have signed up  to this, double what we thought. So I think Australians can be proud of the way that they've  acted during COVID-19. And we're just saying persevere with us for the next two or three  days to make sure we get an understanding that these floodwaters won't take any lives.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



FRAN KELLY: Are we very slow to learn here about our planning laws and where we build  houses? I mean, floods, if I just look at the area around western Sydney, floods are  nothing new. The Hawksbury-Nepean Valley, the Warragamba Dam, when there is an  emptying of the spill of the dam, when it needs to happen, it's always going to end up in  this area. We've got 70,000 people now living in the valley, thousands of houses are built  below the one in 100-year flood level. In western Sydney, the Berejiklian government calls  this a one in 50-year event. Do we need to toughen up our planning laws?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yes. And I think the royal commission into natural disasters, not  just for bushfires but for all natural disasters, clearly articulated, we need better planning…

FRAN KELLY: So who's forcing the states to do that? What's happening on this front? I've  been talking about this issue, at least in the work I've been doing now, for at least 15  years.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: And this is the frustrating thing, Fran, is that between local and  state government, under the Constitution, they own that. We've obviously said to the states  that, as a result of these royal commission findings, it's important that we now fix this. This  is the legacy that we can leave. I mean, there's been 240 reports into natural disasters  since 1920, and most of them are still sitting in the top drawer. And that's why we've made  sure that we've are reporting on a monthly basis the progress of our recommendations that  have come from the royal commission, and we expect the states to do that as well. And  this is the opportunity for them to work with local government to make sure that their  planning laws are right. Local- A state government has that authority over local  government, and we'd expect the state governments to get tighter on this - to understand  the risks of natural disaster to those planning decisions they make. That's just common  sense…

FRAN KELLY: But there was the same decision during bushfire region, about houses  being built in the areas we know are bushfire prone. Here we have it again in flood zones.  We have it all the time in far north Queensland in- after cyclones. Should there be stronger  leadership on this?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, there is.

FRAN KELLY: And hard decisions? Maybe people can't live in their homes anymore?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this is what the royal commission pointed to, and that's why  we've been very forceful with the states around making sure they live up to these  recommendations. This is the legacy that we can leave from the Black Summer and any  other natural disaster moving forward. And that's why I'm committed to making sure that all  those 80 recommendations are implemented. And that means that the states are going to  have to decide and change a little bit of their ways, and they're going to have to make sure  that local government heeds those decisions.

And I think we are going to have to make some tough decisions, Fran, because the  Australian taxpayer can't keep coming back and owning this. So- And we can't be the  insurer of last resort, the Australian taxpayer only has finite resources. And this is where  the states can show some leadership, and look at this honestly, and start to make those  hard decisions with local government.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

We're prepared to make sure that there is accountability from the royal commission. That's  why, every month you will see the progress of those recommendations to making sure that  the public is owed a response, an appropriate response to those- to that royal commission,  and we want the states to live up to it as well as us.

FRAN KELLY: Can I just ask you, finally? The Lower House, the House of Reps will today  vote on a motion calling for a royal commission into veteran suicides - we were speaking  about this earlier in the programme. It's reported that up to six of your colleagues are  considering crossing the floor to support that. There are also reports this morning the  Prime Minister is now open to a royal commission, which is widely supported by the  veterans' community. Is a royal commission now inevitable? And do you support one?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, look, I think you'll see that we've been trying to work  constructively with veterans, not just in the royal commission that looks at the past, but  making sure we set up a structure that looks to the future as well. Now, if that means we  have a royal commission that looks at the past, and we set up an agency or a body that  has royal commission powers to look after the future of our vets, then I'm all, I'm all ears  and I'm all ready to support. And I think that's why we've tried to work with the veteran  community constructively, and I think that's why the Prime Minister isn't against the royal  commission. We just want to make sure we get the settings right in not only looking at the  past, but looking to the future, because…

FRAN KELLY: So will the Prime Minister announce a royal commission today ahead of  that vote? Or will the coalition vote for a royal commission?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I'm not privy to that. The Prime Minister obviously is working  with the vets' community and also our colleagues to making sure that we just get the  settings right. This isn't about politics. This is just about making sure we look after those  men and women that are prepared to put their lives on the line for us, and we do it  properly.

FRAN KELLY: David Littleproud, thank you very much for joining us.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me, Fran.

FRAN KELLY: David Littleproud is the Deputy Nationals Leader, and Minister for  Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management.

Media contact  0455 448 985

