

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,  SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  FRIDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: National Cabinet; COVID-19; Hotel Quarantine; PNG.

KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: The stage is set for a fiery National Cabinet today. The Prime  Minister to face off with Premiers over hotel quarantine.

LEILA MCKINNON, HOST: Let's bring in Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton and Deputy  Opposition Leader Richard Marles. Good morning to you both. Great to see you both, thanks  for coming on the show.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Great to be  here, how good is this?

MCKINNON: It’s amazing isn’t it? We might move up here permanently.

PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Well, a lot of Victorians and New South  Welshmen are as it turns out.

MCKINNON: Fiery, we are saying fiery showdown. What do we expect today and how do you  think the Prime Minister's is going to handle this?

DUTTON: I think the Prime Minister will approach it the same way he has, Leila, from the start,  that is to be consultative with the Premiers and Chief Ministers to make sure there is a  pathway forward. Australia is doing better than probably any other country in the world. We  closed our border with China early, with the rest of the world subsequent to that. We had a  good health response. Now we have the vaccine rollout and obviously the economic response  has been good as well. So, I think you will see the Prime Minister working closely with the  Premiers and Chief Ministers and trying to find consensus.

STEFANOVIC: What will he be saying to State Premiers about hotel quarantine given there  has been another breach and given he has very little power over the Premiers.

DUTTON: Well Karl, the Premiers have each taken a different approach and I know Richard in

the past and others have said well, Scott Morrison should be jumping in doing this. The fact is  the WA Premier has a very different approach than the Victorian Labor Premier or the NSW  Liberal Premier. And they have the ability to run their State as they want under the  Constitution, including in relation to hotel quarantine. There have been different approaches.  But again, we will work with them, but National Cabinet decided last year that the States  employed the doctors and nurses, not the Commonwealth, the States employ the community  police officers and they are the ones doing the security and therefore the quarantine  arrangements were most appropriate for the States to undertake. And look, apart from a  couple of cases it has worked well and I think we continue to provide support to the States to  see them roll out those services.

MCKINNON: Richard another leak in your home State of Victoria. I guess this one is different.  In that the viral load is so huge and the virus is changing. But what can be done to prevent  more outbreaks like this? Because Victorians have really done it tough.

MARLES: Well, certainly the experience that we all had last year means that what Victorians  want is a very cautious response and that's what we are getting from the Victorian  Government.  And I was pleased to see there was a really swift response from the Premier as  soon as there was the slightest hint of an issue there. And I think that did give Victorians a  great degree of confidence and obviously, we really want to see the tennis go ahead.  Melbourne is defined by its events, but it is really important we are taking into account the  medical advice. But the point here is that the Federal Government has responsibility for  quarantine. And, ok, the States are going to run their own show when the Federal Government  abdicates its responsibility for being the national government in our federation and that's what  we have seen from day one.

STEFANOVIC: What about the idea, something needs to be done here, we can't keep going  on and on because the leaks will happen more and more and more, I presume, unless we  have like Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has been talking about, regional hubs. It  looks like Toowoomba wants to have a regional hub. Do you both support that?

MARLES: That's what came out in the Halton review which was done by the Federal  Government about the need to have more quarantine resources and have a good look about  not having them in our capitals.

STEFANOVIC: Do you support it?

DUTTON: Well Karl, we’ve said that we are open to the idea and we have gone back to the  Queensland Premier with a number of questions. The issue and there are many that need to  be dealt with, but the issue around for example flying staff in and out of Cairns to Brisbane,  gives up obviously, you know, obvious issues.

STEFANOVIC: Toowoomba works though, close enough to Brisbane.

DUTTON: Toowoomba might and there is a proposal as I say we've gone back asking some  questions on at the moment. But if air-conditioning was an issue in the Grand Chancellor issue  in Brisbane, they looked right into it because it was a possibility, it turned out not to have been  the case. If you’ve got a facility like a hotel where you have got 500 rooms, you have got  catering, you have got the ability to clean, that has worked very well. Let's be honest about it.  The most important aspect now is the vaccine rollout. Making sure that people take up the  vaccine, making sure we get that herd immunity and that gives us the best chance then to deal

with the reality of it.

MCKINNON: The way you are talking about it makes it seem like that possibility is right off the  table, moving it out of hotels?

DUTTON: If you are going to build a 3,000-bed facility in Toowoomba, it is not going be built  tomorrow, obviously. We want the rollout of the vaccine to start in February. We are hoping  that by the end of this calendar year we are in a much different position than we are now. The  facility may not be built by then, so let's go through the conversation with Queensland,  understand how those risks are being mitigated. But at the moment we have got tens of  thousands of people coming back from overseas and the states are largely doing a good job  and we are supporting that. So I don't think we should be hung up on one or two cases even  though tragically there was a very bad outcome in Victoria to start with, but the lessons are  learnt and we will work closely with them to make sure it does work.

STEFANOVIC: Richard, in relation to the vaccines, you have been chipping and chipping  away at them, Albo has, about the rollout of the vaccine, about the shifting parameters of  goalposts surrounding the rollout of the vaccine. The issue is though, they’ve played an  absolute blinder here. It looks like they have all the vaccines and then some. It is hard to  criticise.

DUTTON: Say something nice, come on.

STEFANOVIC: That's as nice as he gets.

MARLES: Love you brother.

STEFANOVIC: Stop it there.

DUTTON: I want words.

MARLES: I just said I love you brother.

STEFANOVIC: Wow, see what happens on the Gold Coast?

DUTTON: That’s very GC

MARLES: Bright sunny morning. There hasn't been a vaccine - no-one has been vaccinated  yet. So like the proof is going to be in the pudding down the road. We all want to see people  vaccinated. We want to see it happen as quickly as possible. There is no doubt the news this  week of the purchase of extra Pfizer vaccines is a good development. We have been  concerned that the Federal Government has been slow out of the blocks here in terms of  putting us in the queue. But at the end of the day we want this rollout to happen and that's  going to be the answer.

STEFANOVIC: A quick one, China. There is a disturbing story in the front page of 'The  Australian' today, looking to build a new city on Australia's doorstep. Peter, this is your portfolio  or thereabouts. What detail are you hearing and what can we do about it?

DUTTON: Well Karl, there has been a lot of talk about this $200 billion fishing village. We are  obviously very keen to discuss with the PNG government what proposal’s on the table. I see a



statement out of, as reported out of the Prime Minister's office in PNG that they hadn't seen the  proposal. So, we’ve got an incredibly close working relationship with Prime Minister Marape  and the PNG Government. We will have a look at it. I think there are all sorts of sovereignty  issues and there are local issues in terms of landowners and land rights etc. that I think would  provide a significant hurdle. So we will look at it closely, but Australia will always act in our best  interests and we will seek to support our neighbours.

STEFANOVIC: Richard, you are not letting Tanya Plibersek come underneath you in terms of  the leadership? She's coming up like Australia II up the side in the America's Cup. You have to  keep your eye on her, don't you?

MARLES: I know all of you are excited about this conversation. Anthony is doing a great job.  He is going to be leading us to the election and that's what I want to see and that's what Tanya  wants to see. Our aim, much in all as we love him, is to take Peter out of a job of being the  Home Affairs Minister of this country.

STEFANOVIC: Nice to see you two loving each other. It's a beautiful thing.

DUTTON: Are you racing into the water later on?

STEFANOVIC: I will be

DUTTON: Nice.

STEFANOVIC: I’m going to show Australia my le rig.

MARLES: Wow.

STEFANOVIC: The summer le rig.

MCKINNON: Thank you both.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



