

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST  FRIDAY, 29 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Labor Shadow Ministry reshuffle; climate change and energy; Labor  leadership.

NORMAN SWAN, HOST: The Opposition Labor Party's front bench looks a lot different this  morning after a major reshuffle aimed at calming internal tensions. The key issue driving  division is the party's stance on climate change. Mark Butler held the portfolio for seven  years he's now been replaced by Chris Bowen and Anthony Albanese insists the reshuffle  won't lead to a softer position on climate change. (audio file) ‘Chris Bowen has a very  strong position on climate change. I have a strong position on climate change. There is no  way that a Labor government that I lead won't take action on climate change. Zero  possibility.’ Labor leader, Anthony Albanese. Chris Bowen joins us now welcome back to  RN Breakfast.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY: Good  morning Norman. Good to be back in a new capacity.

SWAN: Yes, right, we’ll return a little bit later to your old capacity but let's stick with your  new one. This is a controversial portfolio within Labor, a superficial look at why this has  happened is to please Joel Fitzgibbon.

BOWEN: No, not at all. Mark Butler has been an excellent Climate Change Shadow  Minister but he himself reached the conclusion that after a better part of eight years, it was  time to him for him to meet some new challenges, and time for a fresh set of eyes. Certainly  I indicated to Albo that while I was also happy to continue in health, I'd also be happy to  take on this challenge and that's as it's eventuated. Now I believe climate change is the key  economic challenge for the nation, and of course for the world. That's what Labor does  best, managing economic transitions. That's what Hawke and Keating did, managing the  transition as our national income was sliding and economic reform was needed, but Labor  also understands we invest in people as we go. Climate change policy and energy policy is  the key to getting manufacturing going across our suburbs and regions, building jobs,  creating jobs, and if we get it wrong, jobs will be destroyed Norman, jobs will be destroyed.  All the economic evidence shows that. That net zero by 2050 will create 1000s of jobs, but  if we have continued inaction on climate change jobs will be destroyed. So that is the

argument, I'll be taking up to the government every single day.

SWAN: So why did Joel Fitzgibbon accuse Mark Butler yesterday of being overly ambitious  on climate change since he was aiming for that target too? How will you be different, to  your predecessor?

BOWEN: There was nothing really different in what Joel said yesterday. He's been for 18  months arguing, in effect, that we should have the same policy as the government. Joel is  entitled to that position, I disagree. I think that the government's approach is one which is  destroying jobs, avoiding the opportunity to create jobs for our kids, good jobs in new  industries in growing industries and to ensure a sustainable and clear energy supply for  manufacturing and traditional industries. That is the key to climate change and energy  policy, that's what I'll be focusing on like a laser, and I'll be holding the government to  account. Now, I heard Susan Ley in the interview just before me you know complain about  our lack of policy. I mean the government’s policy, Angus Taylor says they’ll have a 2035  target after the next election, they won't tell us what it is. So it's appropriate to ask us about  our policies and I understand the political tactic which Susan Ley and her colleagues will  engage in, but if the government of the day, won't come up with a climate change target for  2035 until after the election, I'll be holding them to account for that as well. I'll be holding  them to account for Australia being a pariah in not having a target of net zero by 2050. 120  countries around the world do. It's legislated in the United Kingdom, France, Germany in  New Zealand for example, but this government thinks they don't need to do that.

SWAN: You haven't given an interim target either and scientists this week came out and  said that if you don't have a target of 50% reduction in other words, double the reduction by  2030 based on the 2005 levels, you're never going to reach the two degree limit. We're  already heading towards that, and Labor resolutely refuses to commit to a medium term  target.

BOWEN: Well hang on a second Norman, we've made it clear that our policy will be out  there for all to see well before the next election. That's something I'm committed to you as  you'll understand I've been in the job for less than a full day I've got a range of consultations  to embark on with scientists.

SWAN: So you will have a medium term target?

BOWEN: We will have Norman, an evidence based scientifically focused and economically  focused climate change policy at the next election. That's my commitment. It will be based  on the science, the evidence and will be focused on creating good jobs for our kids and  across the suburbs and regions of Australia which is what climate change and energy  policy is all about. I mean we've had 22 energy policies under this government, there's  been a crisis of uncertainty which has driven down investment, which has seen a lack of  investment in all forms of energy, all forms of energy, which is endangering our  manufacturing capacity, and certainly stymying the opportunity to revolutionise  manufacturing and traditional industries across our suburbs and regions on their watch.

SWAN: The federal government will try to wedge you. So for example, are you going to  support a government funded gas-fired power station in the Hunter Valley?

BOWEN: Well this debate is around because private sector investment in energy  generation has plummeted because the lack of policy certainty has seen no private

investment coming forward and hence we have the National Party the good old agrarian  socialists, promising government intervention against the wishes of the South Wales Liberal  Government against the wishes apparently of the urban based Liberal MP’ so we see  massive splits on that side of the fence. Now it's up to the government to provide the  investment framework, so that we see private investment coming forward in all forms of  energy generation. At the moment we're seeing a drought, this discussion is only necessary  because of a government induced drought in energy generation investment.

SWAN: So do you commit then to opposing a government funded gas-fired power station?

BOWEN: Well we’re yet to see any particular concrete proposals. We’ve seen thought  bubbles from the National Party. I'll be focused on generating private sector investment. I'm  not the sort of, you know the National Party seems to think that investment in their pet  projects by tax payers money is a good thing, I want to see a proper energy regulatory  framework with certainty to generate much more investment in renewable energy to give  traditional industries the certainty of their energy supply to ensure manufacturing can be  revitalised in Australia. This is possible, it is possible in Australia to revitalise our traditional  industries to create hundreds of 1000s of jobs and the alternative as Deloitte has pointed  out is to see in coming decades a jobs trap as bad as has been generated by the COVID  pandemic every single year.

SWAN: So how do you argue, how do you keep the balance between say Central  Queensland coal workers and inner-city based voters that will vote in seats like yours  Anthony Albanese’s, Tanya Plibersek’s. How do you keep that balance when the, the jobs  argument can be quite abstract?

BOWEN: It’s been a while since my electorate has been described as inner-city Norman.

SWAN: Well you know what I mean?

BOWEN: Well yeah where I live, where I speak to you today, an hour from the city. But  look, I believe in a compact, a compact between the government of Australia and the  people of Australia. It involves not shirking the big issues, and the biggest issue of all is  climate change, challenging those issues, rising to the challenge of confronting the policies  that are necessary for the country, but investing in people as we go and ensuring no one is  left behind. Whether they be a coal miner in Queensland or a traditional manufacturing  worker in my electorate here in Smithfield in Western Sydney. I represent the biggest  industrial estate in the southern hemisphere, I live on the edge of it. I live this every day,  and I see factories closing. I see the lack of energy policy certainty, having a real impact for  people in my community, every single day. That needs to be fixed as an urgent national  priority.

SWAN: Will Anthony Albanese take Labor to the next election?

BOWEN: Yes, and I'm looking forward to being Minister for Climate Change in his  government.

SWAN: And if there were to be a vacancy in leadership would you go for it?

BOWEN: There won’t be one I don’t envisage.



SWAN: But if there were?

BOWEN: Well I want to be Climate Change Minister, Norman.

SWAN: Okay, so.

BOWEN: There won't be a vacancy in the leadership. Anthony's made clear he's taking the  party to the next election and I expect he will.

SWAN: Chris Bowen thank you for joining us.

BOWEN: Always a pleasure.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931









