



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Senator the Hon Marise Payne  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women  Senator for New South Wales



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

19 February 2021



AUSTRALIA AIMS FOR RE-ELECTION TO INTERNATIONAL  MARITIME ORGANIZATION COUNCIL

Australia will seek re-election to the International Maritime Organization’s (IMO) Council for the  2022-23 biennium to secure its voice at the world’s premier maritime forum.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the prosperity of Australia - one of the founding members of the IMO - relies on  shipping.

“As the world’s largest bulk exporter and with our resources and agricultural exports helping build,  fuel and feed the world, Australia has a strong claim for re-election,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“Re-election for the 2022-23 biennium of Council will ensure Australia’s continued influence in the  activities and decisions of the IMO which are of significant national interest to our country.

“That would mean the continuation of our work for a more transparent, efficient and innovative IMO  and will ensure we have the opportunities to continue advocating for a sustainable shipping industry  well into the future.”

Mr McCormack said Australia’s re-election would allow us to continue to be a strong voice for our  region at the IMO.

“We have championed organisational reform initiatives to strengthen the institution and make it  more balanced, fair and inclusive for all members,” Mr McCormack said.

“Australia supports a bigger voice at the IMO for Small Island Developing States and Least Developed  Countries.

“We strengthen regional maritime capability by funding scholarships,  providing martime technical  support and advocating for digital participation at IMO meetings to ensure access for all member  states - particulary through these difficult times of COVID-19.”

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise Payne, said Australia  had contributed to the IMO since its inception and had earned a reputation for being able to work  across borders with all member states to achieve fair and sustainable decisions.

“IMO outcomes are vital to Australia’s interests, particularly to ensure economic protections for  Australia’s vast shipping exports,” Minister Payne said.

“Our participation on the Council helps us shape standards for international trade and sea transport,  which underpin our modern economy and ensure Australian businesses have a level playing field.

“Re-election will allow Australia to continue to build on decades of collaboration that has resulted in  significant steps forward both environmentally and economically for our country and our regional  partners, from protecting sensitive environments such as the Great Barrier Reef to regulating sulphur  emissions.

“While we have achieved a lot to date, Australia has much more to contribute as a member of the  IMO Council. We look forward to a successful election campaign for 2022-23.”

The IMO is the United Nations’ specialised agency responsible for developing and maintaining  comprehensive standards which apply to the safety, security and environmental performance of  international commercial shipping.

Category B of the IMO Council, to which Australia seeks re-election, comprises 10 seats for countries  with the largest interest in international seaborne trade.



Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Foreign Minister - David Wroe 0429 531 143 | Melanie Ruiz 0427 888 392

