

PATRICK GORMAN MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEMBER FOR PERTH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS WITH TOM CONNELL

THURSDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Borders; baby and middle names; Facebook; nuclear power; Bill Gates;

Craig Kelly.



TOM CONNELL, HOST: Well, joining me live now, my panel, Liberal MP Jason Falinski, from

the Labor Party, Patrick Gorman. Not united, not just yet, Pat we've still got you in Brisbane.

This is, I understand, because of border issues, you're not actually blocked at the moment from

going between WA and Queensland. But you had no faith that the Labor governments of

McGowan and Palaszczuk would give you proper egress, is that right?



PATRICK GORMAN, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA: Not

quite. Tom. My wife's from Brisbane and we are finally here to introduce our new baby, Ruby,

who is now 11 weeks old, to the family. We had hoped to do it in January, but unfortunately,

the unpredictable coronavirus had other plans and the need to keep people safe, both in

Queensland and Western Australia and across Australia. So, we are now here visiting family,

which is delightful. But I also had to see my other family, and that is yourself, Tom and Jason.

So, it's great to be with you.



JASON FALINSKI, LIBERAL MP: Happy to be included. In fact, when do we get to meet - is it

Ruby?



GORMAN: Yeah. You're very high on the list, Jason. And hopefully the whole show will be

there in March.



FALINSKI: Mate, I've got a gift. It's going stale. So, get down here quickly.



CONNELL: It's obviously not for the baby, I don't think they get food at that stage. Is the

possum name actually living on amongst your children, Patrick?



GORMAN: She is very lucky that she has not got my middle name, but she has got my wife's

middle name. So it's Ruby Elizabeth. Which is good for her and probably limits the number of

jokes you can make about family names.



CONNELL: Alright.



FALINSKI: Bad for us then, Patrick, is that your point?



GORMAN: Well, you can fire all your jokes at me, Jason. Just one target. The kids are lucky

enough to have more common middle names.



CONNELL: I think we've used a quarter of the panel to do this so far, so you can judge

whether or not it's well moderated. Probably easy to judge. Let's talk about Facebook, though

Jason Falinski. I went on today, it's a bit of a wasteland. I've got to admit, there are a couple of

people I went to primary school who love a conspiracy theory, and I'm seeing even more of

their posts now.



FALINSKI: Oh well, are you? Well, look, Tom, I encourage everyone who's looking for good

news today to not type in Facebook dot com, but to type in Sky News dot com dot au. That's

what they should do.



CONNELL: Hard to argue. Patrick, any issue here for Labor? Some people are criticising the

Government's handling of this. Is this all on Facebook, considering Google managed to, you

know, find a couple of spare dollars amongst a few trillion of company worth?



GORMAN: Well, I'm not privileged to all of the negotiations the Government have had with the

various online platforms, but I am disappointed in Facebook. This is incredibly childish. It is

hard to believe that they have actively silenced political leaders and indeed in Western

Australia, I'm not his number one fan, but Zak Kirkup, the State Opposition Leader, has had his

Facebook page shut in the middle of an election. Now, this is not an open, free, democratic

action by Facebook. They've silenced one of my state Labor members, Amber-Jade

Sanderson, a rising star of the Labor Party in Western Australia. And they've silenced people

like the Telethon Kids Institute. I mean, whatever Facebook were trying to do, they've done it in

the most stupid and silly way. They need to undo this as soon as possible. And they also need

to apologise. I mean, they are playing with people's ability to communicate. The Department of

Fire and Emergency Services in Western Australia has been silenced by Facebook. I mean, it

is just beyond the pale what they have done. And like I say, I don't know how the Government

has got to this point in their behind the scenes negotiations but maybe whoever has been

leading the negotiations with Facebook, they need to shake things up a bit and just sort it out.



CONNELL: Yes, well Josh Frydenberg. So JF texting MZ. But Jason Falinski, do you have a

message for Mark Zuckerberg?



FALINSKI: Well, I might regret this, but: Mark, this is where you can put your like today [gives

thumbs up].



CONNELL: All right, crass as ever. Let's talk about a push within the Coalition. I found this

quite interesting. On a couple of things, and the Nats pushing this mainly, but it's on nuclear

power, Jason, so according to The Australian, they asked I think about 80 or so Coalition MPs:

one said they'd be against at least having the option of nuclear power in Australia, everyone

else was either for it or undecided. Where do you sit?



FALINSKI: Look, Tom, I think that it's quite clear that when you look at the scientific research,

that people who look at these numbers quite seriously, including Bill Gates, make the point that

if you want to shift the dial on global emissions, then nuclear power has to be part of the mix

and it has to be under consideration. And I don't think that there's anyone or there would be

very few people in this Parliament who really care about climate change who wouldn't say that

you need to have all options on the table. The other thing that you would need to make the

point about is that there are a whole bunch of new technologies coming down the line with

nuclear energy, including the one that I'm fascinated by, which is by TerraPower, which is a

wave reactor, which effectively at end of life has no waste and has no emissions. And the

worst thing that can happen is that it just shuts down. They're obviously modular reactors and

other things of that nature.



CONNELL: So, this is the interesting part of that conversation, Patrick. Australians previously

seemed to decide their views on nuclear. Nuclear energy has changed. What's wrong with a

conversation about this?



GORMAN: Well, it's got to be a fact-based conversation, and I think the technology that Jason

just mentioned is in the development stage. It is not something that can be rolled out in

Australia in the next few years. In terms of what we say about the global solution to climate

change. I mean, let's be honest, Australia is a uranium exporting nation. We do our bit for

those nations that do need this sort of power or indeed have nuclear reactors that already rely

on this fuel to power communities, power nations. But is it the right thing for Australia? Is it

what we should start building in 2021? I don't think so. And if the Coalition want to go to the

next election promising 25 nuclear power stations across Australia, as Mr Howard did in 2007,

well good luck to them.



CONNELL: Do you think this is going to be a concerted push, the Prime Minister will take up,

Jason?



FALINSKI: I don't know, Tom, but I think that if you care about the outcome of our

environment, if you care about slowing global warming, then you have to have every option on

the table. And what we just heard from Patrick then is that the Labor Party will refuse to look at

every option. Now, people who are not me, people who have looked at the facts, who have

looked at the figures, who have done deep dives on these issues, such as Bill Gates, for

example, say that this is the only way for us to proceed and has to be part of the mix. Why, if

this is the once in a lifetime challenge that it is, which Bill Gates said, which Kevin Rudd once

described it, that why wouldn't you have every option on the table? This can only be ideological

opposition. It's not based on facts. It's not based on science. It's just based on ideology.



GORMAN: Jason, when the Liberal Party …



CONNELL: Thirty seconds, Patrick Gorman.



GORMAN: Jason, when the Liberal Party starts listening to Bill Gates on climate change,

when you listen to him on net zero emissions, when you listen to him on investing and

increasing your commitment to the aid budget, then maybe we can have a serious discussion

about nuclear power. But don't use Bill Gates, who has been a great advocate for so many

things. When you've still got, you know, Bill Gates is an advocate for vaccinating the world, you

guys have still got to put Craig Kelly out there saying all sorts of interesting things about

vaccinations. Don't pick and choose which bits of Mr Gates' recommendation to your

Government …



FALINSKI: We're talking about global warming, which, you know, Kevin Rudd used to describe

as the most important moral issue of our times. So why don't we stick to one challenge at a

time when we're talking to Tom, and this is on global warming and Bill Gates says that nuclear

power has to be part of the mix and part of the discussion. Why won't Labor come to the

table?



CONNELL: We'll have to leave it there. I'm sure there'll be more discussions about vaccines

down the track when Jason can give his full and frank views on the Member for Hughes.

Patrick Possum and Jason Falinski, I don't know your middle name, so you get your second

name …



FALINSKI: George.



CONNELL: There you go, Jason George. Talk to you again soon, gentlemen and hope to see

you in the flesh. And enjoy that time with your family as well, Patrick. Thank you.



FALINSKI: See you, Patrick.



GORMAN: Thank you, Tom.  See you, Jason.



FALINSKI: See you, mate.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: DYLAN CAPORN 0437 055 472



