Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

MEDIA RELEASE



22 January 2021

GPs’ key role in COVID-19 vaccination rollout

The Australian Government is seeking expressions of interest from all accredited general  practices to take part in the planned delivery of the COVID-19 vaccine.

General practices will play a key role in the Australian Government’s rollout of COVID-19  vaccines, in what will be one of the greatest logistical exercises, public health or otherwise, in  Australian history.

Providing access to safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines for everyone in Australia is a key  priority for our Government.

General practices will help deliver the vaccine initially to priority groups, starting with people  over 70, adults with underlying medical conditions and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander  people in phase 1b. Three more phases will follow until the whole country has been offered  the vaccine.

The Government will also work closely with Primary Health Networks to determine general  practice distribution points for the vaccine. Over time, there will be more than 1,000  distribution points across Australia.

Applications open 9am tomorrow, at www.health.gov.au.

Australian GPs have considerable experience administering vaccines, with the Australian  Government’s highly successful childhood immunisation program and the influenza vaccines  both exceeding expectations with record engagement. General practices are key players in  Australia having one of the highest vaccination rates in the world.

General practices are the core of our health system and those involved in supporting the  vaccine rollout will include GPs and primary health care nurses, as well as their support staff,  including practice managers, receptionists, cleaners, and IT support.

The vaccine rollout in Commonwealth-funded GP-led Respiratory Clinics and Aboriginal and  Community Controlled Health Services will be administered through separate processes.  They are not required to complete an expression of interest to take part in the rollout.

The COVID-19 vaccine rollout is a new frontier. It will bring new challenges, and I am very  confident that our health care workforce is well placed for this immense task.

An expression of interest for pharmacies will be released next week.

-END-

