Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

MEDIA RELEASE



28 February 2021



Find out when it’s your turn with new advertisements to inform  Australians about the COVID-19 vaccination rollout

The next phase of the Australian Government’s $31 million public information campaign  begins today to inform Australians, with the vaccination program underway.

At the end of Friday after four full days of operation and Monday as a setup day, almost  30,000 Australians had been vaccinated, including 8,110 aged care and disability residents  throughout 117 care facilities.

Both the state and territory teams alongside the aged care in-reach teams are ramping up their  operations, with more vaccines being distributed across the country in the next week.

The initial advertising campaign, which launched on 27 January 2021, focused on informing  the Australian community about the Therapeutic Goods Administration’s world-leading  independent approval process.

The second round builds on these safety messages and informs the community about Phase 1a  of the vaccination program rollout, which prioritises those who are the most at risk of serious  illness from the virus.

The advertising is important, so people understand how the vaccination program is operating,  how they can find out when it will be their turn and answer any questions they have about the  vaccines. They can go to Australia.gov.au and use the Vaccine Eligibility Checker to confirm  which phase of the rollout they will be in.

The campaign will continue to run across a variety of channels, starting with television, and  continuing on radio, press, digital, social, mobile, search and in medical settings and shopping  centres including billboards and signs.

There are two advertisements, one which is animated, and a second which features a  registered nurse, Melanie, who explains the rollout and the current priority groups.

Special committees representing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, people  with a disability and the multicultural communities are consulted regularly to ensure  messaging is clear, appropriate and disseminated through the best communication channels to  reach all people in Australia.

-ENDS-

