

JASON CLARE MP

FEDERAL SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS

MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC ADELAIDE MORNINGS WITH DAVID BEVAN

TUESDAY, 9 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Homelessness in Adelaide; Homeless Aussies thrown back on the street

after COVID; Social housing.



DAVID BEVAN, HOST: Earlier today we were talking about Kirsty and homelessness here in

South Australia. We promised that we talked to Jason Clare. He's the federal Shadow Minister

for Housing. He's in Adelaide today to talk about rough sleepers. Now, let's hope that Kirsty

and her family never get to that. Good morning, Jason Clare. Jason Clare, what do you bring

to this debate here in South Australia?



JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS: I’m here in

South Australia at the invitation of Nat Cook, the Shadow Minister for Human Services and

Steve Georganas, who's the Member for Adelaide, to talk to housing and homelessness

providers here about what's needed to put a roof over the head of people like Kirsty. We

showed last year in the teeth of the pandemic, that if we really want to, you can significantly

reduce the number of people who are sleeping rough people, who are who are homeless. We

did it. A couple of hundred people were provided with short term accommodation in hotels and

motels, a couple of thousands, 40,000 actually, right across the country.



As we're talking here in Adelaide today, the number of people sleeping on the street in

Adelaide, in places like King William Street, is back to what it was this time last year, and that's

before JobKeeper ends, and before the JobSeeker supplement ends. It's a massive missed

opportunity.



BEVAN: So what should we do?



CLARE: Look in places like Victoria, where they were able to get people off the street in the in

the middle of the pandemic they have still got fewer people back on the street today than they

did last year, and that's because they put the money into transitional accommodation, leasing

apartments for people, and building more social housing. The Victorian Labor Government

announced last year the biggest investment in social housing by any state government in

history, something like $5.2 billion.



They're the sorts of things that we need state governments doing across the country and to be

frank, we need the federal government in there as well repairing some of the broken down, old

social housing that's full of leaks and mold and rot, but also building more social housing. Let

me give you an example. Here in South Australia, there's about 1700 public housing homes

that are empty, either because the state government can't find the right people to move in or

because it's not fit for people to live in. For someone like Kirsty, who's on the edge of

homelessness, there's a place that she could potentially move into if the government put a bit

of money in now to repair those broken down homes.



BEVAN: So what do you bring to the debate come the next election, and it's quite likely that

we will have an election before the end of the year. So, are you Jason Clare, federal Shadow

Minister of Housing, saying “Look, I'm going to promise X amount of dollars per capita, for

public housing. If you meet this criteria, you get it. Here's the cheque. Are we here?”



CLARE: Albo, Anthony Albanese, is a bloke who grew up in social housing so he gets it, he

knows how important putting a roof over someone's head particularly when they're a young

child.  We said back in October that, in the middle of the recession, a smart thing to do would

have been to put half a billion dollars into repairing social housing. We made the

announcement actually down here in Adelaide last year. And we did it at a place where the

whole place was riddled with mould. Suddenly the state government reacted and they moved

the gentleman who was living in that place with those awful conditions. That's one of the things

you can do: repairing places that are full of leaks and mould and rot right now. But we've also

said you've got to build more social housing too.





BEVAN: But the question Jason Clare was, will you and this is an election year, will you go to

the people with a policy saying “look, vote for us, and this is what you'll get for social housing

per capita (inaudible). You get this amount of dollars, it's sitting in a bucket waiting for you”.



CLARE: Albo’s said it, I've said it, we’ll go to the next election with a plan to repair and build

more social housing. We’ve got to do that. But in the meantime, you've got Scott Morrison in

Canberra as Prime Minister and a government who could act now. I’ve been calling on them

for nine months when hotels and hotel rooms were full right across the country with people

who've been sleeping rough, for the National Cabinet to act and come together with a plan that

you can implement right across the country to provide permanent accommodation for people.

It's such a lost opportunity. When you had so many Aussies who have been sleeping rough,

some for as long as 20 years, in a hotel room where there's an opportunity to provide services

to those people then when they're in the same place all the time for weeks or months. Now

many of them are back on the street.



The federal government could act. There’s a Budget in May. We don't have to wait for an

election. I hope that the federal government might have a change of heart. Remember, they

spent $100 billion in the last Budget on infrastructure, and not one extra cent for social

housing.



BEVAN: Jason Clare. Thanks for your time.



CLARE: Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ARLEY BLACK 0458 834 978



