

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MCMAHON  SATURDAY, 23 JANUARY 2021



Subjects: vaccine rollout delays; quarantine; Margaret Court; Australia  Day Honours; climate politics debate.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks for coming this  morning. There's a couple of matters I want to touch on before taking questions.  Obviously a successful rollout of the COVID-19 vaccine is key to Australia  getting through 2021 successfully. In health terms and in economic terms. Scott  Morrison told Australians we were first in the queue for Covid-19 vaccine. He  wasn't telling the truth then, and it's certainly not true now. Yesterday we saw  the Prime Minister preparing the ground for shortages in the Pfizer vaccine,  delaying the rollout in Australia. We certainly hope that that is not the case. But  the fact of the matter is that Australia was late to the party under Scott Morrison  in getting agreements for vaccines for Australia. The first vaccine deal was  entered into in March around the world. We didn't get a deal until September.  While of course, Australians will understand that there are supply constraints,  Australians will also understand that by the time the Morrison government did a  deal with Pfizer, a billion doses had already been accounted for around the  world. Australia wasn't at the front of the queue, we were at the back. Now Scott  Morrison has already been forced by Labor into speeding up the rollout of the  vaccine after it is approved by the TGA. He originally said it would happen in the  second half of March, which was operation definitely not warp speed. That's  now been brought forward to February, but now we have the Prime Minister  starting to walk away from that just a few weeks after the announcement. Now  the government needs to do what it should have done months ago, if possible to  enter into more deals although it may now be too late. It also needs to ensure  that the Pfizer deal is delivered on. We were told there were 10 million doses,  which is enough for 5 million Australians. Those doses need to be delivered and  delivered urgently. The Prime Minister has said that by the end of March, there'd  be very considerable rollout of the vaccine. He needs to assure Australians that

that is the case. The vaccine, it's procurement and its rollout is the key  responsibility of the Morrison government. It is a key responsibility. They cannot  wipe their hands and blame the companies or the states or anybody else for not  having enough vaccines in Australia for an urgent rollout and for that rollout to  occur as efficiently and as quickly as is safe and is possible. The Labor Party's  position has always been crystal clear. We support the independence of the  TGA, we will not call for the TGA to do anything more or more quickly than they  feel comfortable doing but once the TGA has done their job, then it is Scott  Morrison's job to ensure the vaccine is rolled out as quickly as is safe and is  possible across Australia, and quite clearly he has not been doing that job. The  second matter I want to deal with is the matter of quarantine. Now, there are  some grey areas when it comes to federal state responsibility. You know health  education have shared responsibilities, and there can be disagreements about  who's responsible for what. Quarantine is a federal government responsibility. It  is Scott Morrison's job. It is one of his key performance indicators and he is  failing at it. We see concerning news this morning from the UK reports that the  B117 strain, which we already knew was more contagious, may also be more  serious, may lead to greater disease and greater suffering from those who  suffer it. We have Australians stranded in the United Kingdom in Latin America,  around the world. You know, an Australian passport that thing we carry when  we go overseas used to mean something. Used to mean that when you needed  to come home, you could come home, to your home Australia, that you had a  right to return to your country when you needed to. Under Scott Morrison it no  longer means that under Scott Morrison that passport no longer means you  have the right to come home when you're in trouble. Australians are Australians  whether they are here or they are overseas they deserve the support of their  government. Now Scott Morrison is standing on the side of the street and  watching the state Premiers take the load of quarantine, managing this more  contagious strain of the virus and potentially more dangerous strain of the virus  with very little support from him. I say to Scott Morrison, look at your job  description, and in your job description, there is quarantine, Australia's borders.  Actually work with the Premier's, get Australians home safely ensure that the  quarantine is strong enough for this new strain B117 and other strains which are  emerging and give Australians overseas the support they deserve. You're an  Aussie, whether you're here or there, you're still an Aussie and the Prime  Minister of Australia should be on your side. Scott Morrison has not been on the  side of those Australians stranded overseas. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: So in light of that new, potentially deadly strain on new  information about that, should the 50% cap on arrivals remain, should that be  adjusted?

BOWEN: I'd be reluctant to see the number of Australians coming home  reduced even further. As I said, Australians should have rights to return to their

country, we need to ensure that the quarantine system is strong enough to  withstand that strain. Now, the Premier of Queensland has put forward ideas  and Scott Morrison just says well, that's a matter for her. Well, I'm sorry, that's  not good enough. Jane Halton, the former secretary of both the Department of  Health and Finance, provided a report to Scott Morrison months ago about  national quarantine facilities. It sits unloved and unimplemented on his desk.  Nobody's suggesting these are easy issues, but I am suggesting that if the  Prime Minister is not interested in them, then they're not going to be fixed. And  the Prime Minister is the person with the job with the leadership, which goes  with the job of fixing this issue and ensuring that the states get the support they  need. He is failing miserably at it.



JOURNALIST: So you say you’d be reluctant for it to be reduced any further.  Do you want to see it increased?

BOWEN: Oh, well, we want to see Australians return home. There's 40,000  stranded across the world. Now we've never suggested they can all come on at  once. We've never suggested, they've never suggested, you know that there's  some easy way of getting them back all in one go, but they need hope. I mean,  I've been dealing with people who in my own community that are stuck in South  America. Every MP across the country will be dealing with that. They’re  heartbreaking stories because we've seen them through the COVID-19  Committee giving evidence saying where is the federal government, getting us  home, helping us home, people having to pay, you know, $20-30,000 and then  having the flights cancelled continually. These are heartbreaking stories. These  are our brothers and sisters, our cousins, our fellow Australians. And what Scott  Morrison doing about it. When he glibly says, Oh, well, you know, anybody was  on the list got returned before Christmas. Well, Australians are dealing with all  sorts of complicated circumstances overseas, and constraints, but the one thing  they're dealing with also is a federal government, which simply doesn't care  about their fate.



JOURNALIST: Just on the GG’s comments this morning, he says that the  criticisms on the Order of Australia are valid. Do we need a revamp of the way  these awards are handed out?

BOWEN: I was very pleased to see the Governor General's comments. I think  he's right. The Order of Australia needs to be for all Australians and frankly, far  too often, it hasn't been. It's not just about gender disparity, as important as that  is, but as a Western Sydney MP, I scour the list every, there’s an  announcement, Australia Day, in particular, for local heroes that can be  celebrated in the Order of Australia. I have to tell you, often it's slim pickings. It's  not because we have a shortage of volunteers here in Western Sydney. People  who often don't have much themselves, giving back to the community, their time

and their resources over many, many decades in many cases. Working their  guts out for sporting groups, community groups, charitable groups, and they get  nominated, I know they get nominated, they tend not to receive an award  though, and I think that's a real shame. So I very much welcomed and was  pleased to see his excellencies intervention and some recognition on his behalf  that the Order Australia does need to be refreshed and modernized to ensure  that all Australians from all walks of life in the city and the suburbs, in the  regions, in the bush, rich and poor, contribute to our country and deserve a right  to be recognized in the Order of Australia when they've entered.



JOURNALIST: Any thoughts on the mechanism, what would change in order to  achieve that?

BOWEN: Well I think, you know, I think the Governor General has started on a  very genuine process, we should let that process roll through. But the objective  has to be that Orders of Australia should not be dominated by one particular  profession or particular groups of suburbs or one gender or people of one  ethnicity, but reflect Australia. There are good Australians doing great work  every day right around Australia in the community, and I don't think that's being  reflected in the Order of Australia. I think the Governor General has to his very  great credit recognised that today.



JOURNALIST: Question from the Sydney Morning Herald. Two things. First of  all, what’s your view on Margaret Court being made a Companion of the Order  of Australia? Was that an appropriate award? Secondly on the vaccine, would  you like to see the rollout speed up and if so how given the global constraints  we’re seeing on the Pfizer vaccine, for example?



BOWEN: Thanks James, in the order that you asked them. Margaret Court has  already been honoured for her tennis achievements. She was already a  member of the Order of Australia for that purpose. I think we would welcome  seeing justification for her promotion in the Order of Australia given that her  tennis achievements have already been recognised. In relation to Mrs. Court  more generally, obviously, I strongly support freedom of religion, I support  respecting people's religious views, but I would invite Mrs Court to reflect on the  fact that her views and the way she has expressed them have not always been  respectful to other Australians have caused great hurt and anguish for many,  many Australians, and, in my very strong view, have not reflected mutual  respect and respect for people's beliefs and respect for people's sexuality, that  is an important part of being a modern Australian. In relation to the vaccine,  James, the vaccine needs to be rolled out as quickly as it can be following TGA  approval. Now the government has been all at sea on this. Originally they said  January, then they said March and Anthony Albanese, and I pointed out that as  soon as it's been approved by the TGA, it should be rolled out. Scott Morrison

said we need batch testing which they're not doing in the UK, which was a lie.  They are doing batch testing in the UK, yet they've still managed to have a quick  rollout. Vaccines don't save lives, vaccinations save lives. That's why we need  to see as many Australians as possible vaccinated. Now I recognise the  constraints. I recognise the constraints, particularly as the Morison government  has entered into three deals, when international best practice is at least five and  arguably six deals to give the chance to get the best vaccines for Australians  and the quickest vaccines for Australians. We don't know exactly, and we  certainly didn't know which vaccine was going to develop more quickly and  which would be the safest. The government was right to enter into a deal with  the University of Queensland. I don't criticise them for that deal failing. What I do  criticise them for is not more deals. We don't have any direct access to the J&J  vaccine. We don't have any direct access to the Moderna vaccine, both showing  very, very promising signs as being good and effective vaccines which are  easier to roll out than others. If the federal government had done its job, if there  was a Pfizer delay, it would be less of an issue if we had Moderna and J&J  rolling through, not putting all our eggs in the AstraZeneca basket, as the Prime  Minister was indicating was his preferred plan yesterday.



JOURNALIST: Just on the vaccine where exactly in the in the purchasing  decision do you think the government made a misstep? And do you think it was  the government? Or do you think it was  the TGA or the expert medical advice  that the government's been receiving. Also if I can ask you about Cricket  Australia as well. They are seeking to get their team and support members  vaccinated ahead of the South African trip next month, do you think that that is  reasonable?



BOWEN: I have not one word of criticism of the TGA. The TGA deserves the  support of everybody in public office, their independence and authority should  be respected. We've said that consistently every single day. So this is not the  fault of the TGA. The TGA should take all the time they need to approve the  Pfizer vaccine and indeed any other vaccine, you'll find nobody in the Labor  Party criticising the TGA. The only people you'll find criticizing the TGA is Craig  Kelly. Now in relation to where the government went wrong. As I said, the first  deal was entered into in March by the United States. The Trump administration  got a lot of things wrong when it came to COVID-19, but they entered their first  advanced supply agreement in March. We didn't enter an agreement until  September. By the time we entered an agreement, a billion doses of the Pfizer  vaccine had already been accounted for by other countries. When Scott  Morrison said we were first in the queue, he was just plain wrong. Now we only  have three deals, when we should have five or six. If we had five or six, we'd be  in a much, much stronger position. A much better position. That's where the  government went wrong Kerry, too little too late in terms of vaccine procurement  for Australia. Do we have any other questions?





JOURNALIST: Just on Cricket Australia.

BOWEN: Oh, sorry sorry. My apologies if I forgot that one for a second. Look on  Cricket Australia, I guess my general point Kerry would be if we had more  vaccines, then the cricketers could be vaccinated and everybody could be  vaccinated, it wouldn't be an issue. This is only an issue because we have a  very slow rollout of vaccines in Australia. Everybody agrees, it's been a  federal/state agreement on the order of the rollout in terms of the elderly and  healthcare workers first, but after that, it should be the case that every  Australian should get access as soon as possible whether they play cricket or  not. And if the Morrison government had better plans in place for vaccine  procurement and rollout, then this wouldn't be an issue. In the meantime, we  have to respect the rollout plans that have been entered into including the order  of priority with the elderly and healthcare workers first.



JOURNALIST: Scott Morrison says the political debate about reaching a carbon  neutral future is finished is that right?

BOWEN: Well, the man the man who said that electric cars will be the death of  the weekend. He said he was going to stand by Australia's tradies because the  Labor Party did to promise cheaper electric cars for Australians and better  charging facilities. The man who every day of the last election campaign said  that net zero by 2050 would be an economic catastrophe for Australia and  demanded to see the cost. He now declares unilaterally the battle over? Really?  A man who has no plan for reducing carbon emissions to net zero by 2050 in  Australia says the battle is over. Well, the Labor Party will go to the next election  with a strong policy on climate change, will go with a strong policy for energy  certainty for Australia. Scott Morrison can declare the battle over if he wishes,  but after the destructive role he's played on climate politics in Australia I think  Australians are entitled to take that with a grain of salt. Any other calls on the  line? All good? Okay, that's a wrap. Thanks, everyone.

ENDS



MEDICA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931









