

STEPHEN JONES MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES AND SUPERANNUATION

MEMBER FOR WHITLAM





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

SYDNEY

THURSDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s broken superannuation promise; insecure work; portable

entitlements; older workers' crisis.



STEPHEN JONES, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: It's great to be here with members

of the Transport Workers Union who do a great job, day in day out ferrying the passengers of

Sydney from their home to their work, particularly through the pandemic when they were often

putting their lives at risk to ensure that we could keep as much normality as possible in our

lives. So I want to thank them for the work that they do in ensuring that Sydney works by

keeping our transport system working.



Before the last election Scott Morrison promised that he would leave superannuation alone. A

very straightforward promise. After the election, he's changed his mind. He now has a plan to

cut workers’ superannuation. We're going to fight him because we think it's unfair. It's unfair

that the Prime Minister and every other Member of Parliament pulls in 15.4% superannuation

on their earnings, but they reckon 9.5% is enough for ordinary workers. It's not right and it's not

fair. Scott Morrison engaged this bunch of consultants to try and back in his plan to cut

workers’ superannuation, and they said 9.5% might be enough under certain circumstances.

But then you look at the detail, the “certain circumstances”, are wages are growing by 4%

every year well into the future when they haven't grown by 4% for the last decade and that

earnings on superannuation are going to go up by 7% a year. Well 9.5% is not going to be

enough to provide a decent retirement for the workers like the people who are driving the

buses here out of the Burwood Depot in Sydney.



Scott Morrison will accrue more superannuation in two years than the average Australian

retires on. The 15.4% is enough for Scott Morrison when he's accruing more every two years

than most Australians are retiring with. How come 12% is not a fair deal for these workers

behind me? How come 9.5% is enough for these workers, but 15.4% is necessary for Scott

Morrison? It's just not fair. Now in a moment I'm going to invite Marta to come up and tell a little

bit about her story and why she thinks it's absolutely critical that Scott Morrison keep his

promise to leave superannuation alone. No cuts to superannuation. Labor is backing these

workers 100%. Scott Morrison has got to deliver on the promise he made to the Australian

people before the last election. Marta.



MARTA FOLKARD, BUS DRIVER: The reason why I'm here and is because I should have

already been retired. The reason I cannot retire is because I don't have enough in my super to

be able to live a comfortable life. I don't ask for much. All I want is to be able to retire on the

money that was promised to us in our super, rather has to work until past retirement age. I'm

not sure how I'm going to keep my house in the future and I probably will have to sell my

house. My rates are going up. My strata levels are going up. But my super is not going up. If

I'm supposed to live off of that super my options are to work until I drop dead or to sell up and

move in with my sister. None of those suit me. Please give us what we are entitled to and what

you promised. Make us all live happily here and afford a life and a living here where we should

be in Australia.



JOURNALIST: As a woman, did you take any time out during your career and has been

woman affected your super levels?



FOLKARD: Certainly being a woman has affected my super levels. And yes, I did have a bit of

a break in my career. However, equal pay equal opportunities and how about equal super? I

mean that might be a very good start. Just because we have taken time out to look after our

families should not penalise us later on when we're trying to get on with our lives so that we

aren't actually impacting on anybody else. I don't want to be relying on my family or my sister

or my children. The whole Australian thing is that we look forward to being able to pass

something on to our children. The only thing we're passing on to them is that they're going to

have to look after us give us. Give us our super that we were promised and that we're entitled

to so we can live the way that we should be living here in Australia.



JOURNALIST: Do you think Labor should be considering portable entitlements for people in

insecure jobs?



JONES: Look, I think we've got a problem in Australia that a spotlight was placed on during the

pandemic. One in 4 Australians are in some form of casual or insecure work. Now previously

we just thought that was a problem for the people who are in casual employment. Insecure

work, couldn't get a bank loan. Couldn't plan their future if they were sick. They didn't get sick

leave when they took a holiday they couldn't get holiday pay. We used to think that was just a

problem for the casual workers. But now we know that it's also a problem for society. If a

security guard has got to have two or three jobs to put a roof over their head and to put food on

the table, that's a problem for them but during a pandemic it's also a risk to society. And that

has had devastating impacts during the pandemic. It's not just security guards, its cleaners, its

hospitality workers, it's too many workers in Australia.



I think we're up to three workers in the last fortnight who have been killed on the job because

they're doing some form of gig economy job, delivering food on a push bike. Surely those

workers deserve to come home safely every night. And what Labor wants to do is ensure that

they are treated with the same sorts of rights that any other employee would get.



JOURNALIST: So a portable entitlements plan, do you think that is something Labor should

be looking at?



JONES: I think we absolutely should be looking at portable entitlement entitlements. We

absolutely should be looking at the crisis we've got in casual and insecure employment. If one

in four Australian workers are in some form of insecure work, that means one in four Australian

workers can’t plan their life, can't get a home loan, doesn't know whether they're going to have

a job next week and has to engage in all the sorts of dangerous and insecure practices that

we've seen in the gig economy and people doing deliveries on push bikes. And people well say

well this is the future, this is just modern IT, frankly I think there's nothing new about exploiting

workers. That's old economy. Let's ensure as we move forward that we've got the right source

of rights and protections for workers, same sorts of things that most Australians were think

were fair and reasonable.



JOURNALIST: But on the other side of the equation, Australia is in deep debt. Do you have

concerns about costing a plan like this?



JONES: Why is it the first instinct of the Liberals, when we say we want to do something to

improve workers conditions, is to say you'll get a pay cut, we're going to threaten your job?

That is their first instinct. When we're saying workers should be treated fairly and with dignity,

the very first thing that the Industrial Relations Minister for the Liberal Party comes out with is

it’ll cost you your job, it'll cost you your pay. Is that the sort of Australia were trying to build

back to after the pandemic and after the economic recession? Right now, we should be

planning for the workforce of the future and what Australia is going to look like as we come out

of this recession. And frankly going from one in four workers to one in three workers in

insecure work is not a future workforce that Labor wants to plan for. More workers in decent

jobs means a better economy for everybody.



JOURNALIST: I know it touched on this a little but what are your concerns when it comes to

older job seekers? What do you think Labor should do (indistinct)?



JONES: We've got a silent crisis with older workers. We've got 20% of workers aged 55 to 64

who are out of a job. If this was younger workers, we would quite rightly say this is a national

crisis and every organ of Government would be focused on fixing that problem. We've got a

crisis. One-in-five older workers out of work, most of them finding it twice as long to get back

into a job, and nobody's talking about it. In fact, the only response from this Government is that

in a few weeks’ time, they're going to they're going to cut their income support. So let's ensure

that we're providing them with income support while there are out of work, which is going to

keep them in the necessities of life. Let's ensure that our employment services are fit for

purpose. Let's ensure that when they are dealing with Centrelink or dealing with employment

agencies that their circumstances are taken to an account. Let's ensure that we send a

message to employers that older workers have a lot of value in your workplace. They've got

experience. They've got skills. They've got knowledge. We think they've got a lot of value and

that message should be coming from the very top from the Prime Minister from the Treasurer,

from every leader in Government and from business leaders as well. When you turn 55 that



shouldn't mean you're thrown on the scrap heap. It means we think you've got a big future and

we want to look after you.



JOURNALIST: Your leader Anthony Albanese has said that the next election shouldn’t be a

referendum on the Morrison Government’s response to the coronavirus pandemic, but instead

it should be about competing visions for Australia. But do you think that is a realistic goal given

the whole world has been overtaken by this coronavirus pandemic and compared to the rest of

the world, it seems like the Morrison Government has done a good job getting Australia

through the worst of it?



JONES: Australia is done better than a lot of other countries because Australians have pulled

together. Australia has done better than a lot of other countries because of the social safety

net that Labor put into place. Australia has done better than a lot of other countries because

Labor pushed the Liberals out of their comfort zone and said we need to put JobKeeper in

place. We need to increase the rate of JobSeeker. We need to look after people who've lost

their job through the pandemic. And if it's Labor policies that have got us through the crisis, it'll

be Labor policies that get us through the recovery. And if the best that Scott Morrison can do

for the future of our economy is to cut your super, cut your wages and give you more insecure

employment then that's not a future we should be looking forward to. We need a bigger, bolder

vision for the future of our workforce, and for the future of this country. One that all Australians

can share the benefits in.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TOM IGGULDEN 0448 081 191



