

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS

MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION

MONDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: News Media and Digital Platforms Mandatory Bargaining Code; hotel

quarantine; net zero emissions by 2050.



PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: Joining me now live is Michelle Rowland, Shadow Minister for

Communications. Michelle, good to see you and thanks for joining us. First of all, I just want to

get an update on Google which seems to be softening its stance in its ongoing stoush with the

Government. Are you buying that?



MICHELLE ROWLAND, SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS: Well this has been

the big question in recent days: Google, will they stay, or will they go? It has been pointed out

that whilst the underlying premise is sound and Labor supports a workable code and has

supported it in-principle from the get-go, it is also important to ensure that the outcomes are

achieved. that is that we have more extensive public interest journalism in Australia.



Now what Google has done in recent days is launch its Google News Showcase and that is

the frame through which it contends it should be required to make a contribution for news

content, recognising that news content is a special type of content. It remains to be seen

whether that will be the designated item that will be subject to regulation under the Code as the

Treasurer seemed to indicate some time ago. However, also interestingly, the boss of the

ACCC seems to be somewhat sceptical of this, contending that the value of Google Search,

the links and such that accrue to the platforms, would not be properly recognised under such a

model.



We have the Senate handing down its report on Friday and we have legislation before the

Parliament. All of these considerations of stakeholders will all work into the mix and one would

hope that the end result is greater innovation for all Australians and a strong public interest

journalism sector in this country.



STEFANOVIC: I was reading some interesting stats in The Australian that the online

behemoths, such as Google and Facebook, actually increased their staff numbers during the

pandemic by as much as seven per cent while media organisations went the other way in a

much deeper way. Obviously, the money is there. They can front up, but they are trying to not

do their bit.



ROWLAND: To be frank as well, Google and the other platforms such as Facebook have said

they are willing to pay for news content. The question of course is the mechanism. We need to

remember too that this has global ramifications, given they are such important multinationals

with such significant market power, and therein lies the problem. There has been that

imbalance that has been identified by the ACCC and the need to redress that for Australian

news media and Australian consumers.



STEFANOVIC: Just a few quick ones, Michelle. First of all, there’s only one case but there’s a

new case in NSW. The interesting thing is that the positive case came on day 16. The person

completed the hotel quarantine, did 14 days, was negative but then tested positive on day 16.

This is new, this is a new development. What sort of concerns do you have about this, and

may this require a rethink of the amount of time people need to spend in quarantine?



ROWLAND: It certainly is problematic, and I would not profess to have the latest health

professional qualifications to answer that, but I can offer two things. Firstly, just on

observations within my local community, people have been doing the right thing and cautioning

one another against complacency. So, it is deeply concerning when we see these cases

coming out of quarantine and clearly this is one of our biggest challenges when it comes to

fighting COVID. The other part however is that we know the Halton Review was handed down

in August last year which recommended different approaches to quarantine. We know that

we’ve got some 40,000 waiting to come home, we know that there are some mutant strains

emerging. So, it is deeply concerning, and the Commonwealth should step up and take greater

responsibility, rather than devolving this issue to the states as they have done. It is a Federal

responsibility and I think as you have demonstrated, as some of those health circumstances

become known, it becomes such a new area that becomes more problematic and we need to

have a diversified response to it.



STEFANOVIC: Moving the quarantine responsibility to the states was done early in the

pandemic to allow the Federal Government to take on other issues. Quarantine was then

decided to be a state issue, right?



ROWLAND: It is still the fact that quarantine is within the Constitution as a Federal

responsibility. I think that any responsible government would be looking at the areas where we

do have these cases of clear concerns and that is arising from hotel quarantine and to step in,

examine what need to be done, and take appropriate action.



STEFANOVIC: Just finally, I know this is outside your portfolio area as well, but I’m interested

to get your view on the path to net zero. There was talk over the weekend, with the Nationals

saying that agriculture should get a leave pass. What do you think about that? Is that a

reasonable request, following on from what New Zealand has done?



ROWLAND: On one hand, it’s not novel. As you say in New Zealand that is the approach, and

that was also the approach under Labor’s CPRS scheme. But let’s remember, this is

something like the twenty second policy that this Government has had when it comes to

climate change and net zero emissions. Australia is one of the few developed countries in the

world that hasn’t committed to it. Some 70% of our trading partners have. Here we have

another thought bubble about how we deal with it. The reality is that global markets are moving

away from carbon intensive industries and Australia has a choice: we need to take action to

encourage investment and jobs in the sector, and that requires responsible and certain climate

change policies. We need those jobs in the regions and in our outer metro areas. We also

need to step up as a leader in our region, the Pacific.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah, I mean Labor gave credits to the most trade exposed industries. So, is it

reasonable to do that again?



ROWLAND: Well, let’s look at where we are now. That was some years ago now and certainly



the world has moved on. I note that in the United States, President Biden has made it very

clear that he acknowledges the challenges being faced by traditional sectors and said that he

would be honest with them about the changes that need to be made. It’s about time that this

Government stepped up, made a commitment, and gave some honesty about where they are

going to go with this.



STEFANOVIC: Michelle Rowland, good to chat.



ROWLAND: Pleasure.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM BOIDIN 0406 009 019



