

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

ADELAIDE

SATURDAY, 3 APRIL 2021



SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s failures on vaccine rollout; AstraZeneca concerns;

Stranded Australians; hotel quarantine.



MARK BUTLER MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: Thanks for

coming out this morning in Adelaide. I want to say a few words first about the case that

emerged yesterday in Melbourne, of a clotting event for a patient some days after receiving

one of the COVID-19 vaccines.



I received a briefing as the Shadow Health Minister from the Deputy Chief Medical Officer

Dr. Michael Kidd and Minister Hunt’s office yesterday. I'm grateful for that that serves the

country well when the Government is open with the Opposition about these events. I was

advised the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI) is looking

closely at this case. Yesterday ATAGI published updated advice about potential clotting

events after receiving patients receiving the COVID-19 vaccines. I understand also the

TGA is analysing this Melbourne case as is usual or standard procedure in the event of a

potential adverse event following the admission of a vaccine.



We obviously are waiting any updated advice from the TGA and also from Chief Medical

Officers as well as ATAGI, as is appropriately published by them. I can say also we

understand that this patient in Melbourne is faring relatively well. He's in stable condition as

we understand it, not in the intensive care unit and we all wish him a quick and speedy

recovery.



Can I say that Labor's view is that Australia has been very well served by our close

adherence to the public health advice. The advice from our extraordinary public health

experts, you haven't seen that everywhere else across the world. And Labor's position is

that we will be guided by the advice of the TGA, ATAGI and our Chief Medical Officers

about this clotting issue in relation to the vaccines as well. So we await that advice. I look

forward to for further briefings but Labor's position, as I understand the Government's

position will be, will be to continue to follow the advice of our extraordinary public health

experts.



JOURNALIST: So you’re comfortable with the AstraZeneca rollout continuing while the

TGA assesses that case?



BUTLER: The TGA is looking urgently at that case, as we understand it. ATAGI has

published updated advice for the technical advisory group on immunisations, about how

how patients and health practitioners should deal with potential clotting events associated

with the vaccines. We encourage people obviously to follow that advice. We know that

TGA is urgently seized of this, as are all of the state territory and Commonwealth chief

medical officers and we await their advice which we would expect very shortly.



JOURNALIST: I can understand that it might create some uncertainty amongst Australians

generally, though?



BUTLER: Of course, and that is why I come back to the point that has served us so well

over the 12 or 13 months of this pandemic here in Australia and that is adherence to public

health advice. We have an extraordinary group of public health experts in this country.

We're very lucky. We’ve been well served by them. They're looking at this case and other

evidence from around the world urgently. They will provide advice and we encourage both

governments but also the border community to follow that advice.



Can I say a  few words about the rollout before I come to any other questions. We've seen

reports this morning that as of the last latest measurement, a little under 750,000 people

have received at least their first dose of one of the COVID-19 vaccines. Australians

remember that Scott Morrison promised that 4 million Australians would have received the

vaccine by the end of March, we're now into April, so a commitment that has not even

come close to being reached. We are six weeks into the vaccine rollout. We've only done

not even 750,000. To put that in context the United Kingdom is vaccinating 750,000 people

on a single day in many cases. So we are way, way behind. Scott Morrison said we'd be at

the front of the queue. We're currently not even in the top 100 nations of the world in terms

of vaccination per head of population. And we've again seen reports that the aged care

sector is way behind schedule. We were supposed to have completed vaccinations of the

most vulnerable members of our community, aged care residents and their workforce by

now, it was intended to take place over six weeks. But six weeks in, less than a third of

aged care facilities have received even a single dose and only 1/10th of aged care facilities

have received the two doses that fully protects these incredibly vulnerable members of the

community.



I saw a report this morning that that figure was even lower in Queensland, with the

Commonwealth Government, the Morison Government only delivering vaccine doses, the

single dose, to a quarter of Queensland aged care facilities. Now yesterday, I encouraged

the Prime Minister Scott Morrison to take up the offer from Gladys Berejiklian, the New

South Wales Premier, to assist the Commonwealth to get this vaccine rollout back on track.

We are clearly way behind scheduled this vaccine rollout is becoming a mess. And I'm sure

all Australians will welcome the admission by Scott Morrison this morning that he simply is

not up to the job of delivering his own vaccine rollout strategy and for the umpteenth time in

this pandemic, he is going to have to be bailed out by state governments.



JOURNALIST: Is it the Federal Government or the state governments to blame for the

slow rollout? Because there is claims about late notifications of arrival of supplies and that

the system isn't designed to roll out small batches to small locations? Where does the

blame actually lay?



BUTLER: The vaccine rollout strategy is a strategy of the Commonwealth. The

Commonwealth has control over supply of the vaccines. There have been hundreds of

thousands of vaccine doses in the country for weeks now that have not been put into

people's arms. So when aged care facilities say that they've not been told when the

vaccines will arrive at their facility, when aged care facilities tell us that they lined up their

residents - often family members came into the facility to be with their mum or their dad

while they got the vaccine, because that's when the aged care facility was told the

vaccination would take place - for nothing to happen, for no one to turn up. This is the

responsibility of the Commonwealth.



Again, when GPs are told that they're ready to go. The GP side of the Commonwealth can

vaccinate hundreds and hundreds of patients in their practice every single week but only

get but only get 50 doses. That is the fault of the Commonwealth.



Now, this has simply got out of control. It's beyond Scott Morrison to do this properly, the

health of the country, the strength of our economic recovery depends upon it. And I think

what we see this morning from reports of the Commonwealth finally admitting failure, and

again, agreeing to be bailed out by state governments through this pandemic. Is that clear

evidence of failure.



JOURNALIST: There were reports that the state run hubs will help with the vaccine rollout

in New South Wales, that wasn’t part of the Federal Government's initial plan, what does

that tell you?



BUTLER: Well, it tells you that Scott Morrison has finally woken up to what everyone has

realised now for some time, and that is the Government's vaccine rollout strategy is not

working. Every single promise the Prime Minister has made, 4 million by the end of March,

finishing aged care within six weeks, they’ve not only missed those commitments, they

haven't even come close. That's why I yesterday encouraged the Prime Minister to

recognise he's not up to the job of delivering his own vaccine rollout. He needs again to be

bailed out by state governments.



We've seen this time and time again throughout this pandemic. Whether it was the decision

making about when to lock down different communities or different states to deal with

outbreaks. Whether it's the hotel quarantine system, for the first time in a century a

quarantine system not run by the Commonwealth. And now the vaccine roll out. Time and

time again, we've seen a Commonwealth Government under Scott Morrison’s leadership

not up to the job having to be bailed out by state governments that are doing all the heavy

lifting on this.



JOURNALIST: Is it wise than for the Federal Government to keep setting these vaccination

targets if they're not being met?



BUTLER: I think what we're seeing is, every time a target is missed, a new target is put in

place and within a very short period, we understand that that's not going to be satisfied

either. So what I've said over the last several days is the first thing for Scott Morrison and

Greg Hunt is to admit they’ve got it wrong, they're not up to the job of delivering the

strategy they published many weeks ago and they need either to start again and work out

how we're going to get back on track or admit failure, and yet again, get bailed out by state

governments. I think that's what we're seeing this morning in New South Wales.



JOURNALIST: Queensland Premier is talking about cutting the number of international

arrivals and reducing the cap on international arrivals. Is that going to be fair for Australians

who are still stranded overseas?



BUTLER: Well, 40,000 Australians have been stranded overseas. Again, the Prime

Minister promised to get them home before last Christmas, we are in April and they're still

stranded overseas. And that's just again, evidence of a failure by this Government to put in

place proper quarantine procedures. The Commonwealth has been responsible for

quarantine arrangements around our international borders for a century. I don't think

anyone can pretend or can think of a politician in recent times, who has made more of of

his prowess in managing our international borders. Yet at a time of pandemic, when we

have tens of thousands of Australians stranded overseas, he has been missing in action.

And again, the state governments have had to step into the breach. Across a number of

different jurisdictions people have proposed purpose built quarantine facilities supported by

the Commonwealth Government of the time we see in the Northern Territory. They have

been proposed for months now and nothing has happened.



JOURNALIST: So you would oppose any cut in the cap?



BUTLER: No, we think it's understandable given what Queensland has gone through over

the last week or 10 days, that the Queensland Government would want to make sure that

they had that outbreak under control before they returned to a situation normal. But I think

the fact you see this happening every couple of weeks, every single outbreak we've seen

over the last few months, has largely come through hotel quarantine in one form or

another, reflects the fact that Commonwealth has sat back and done nothing about an area

of responsibility that has been theirs for a century.



JOURNALIST: Just back to AstraZeneca, some European countries and Canada have

suspended the use of AstraZeneca for younger age groups. Is that something Australia

should consider?



BUTLER: Well, I know that the Australian authorities are considering what's happening

overseas. They're staying in touch with their sister medicines authorities in Europe and

North America. I know from the briefing I received yesterday from the Deputy CMO that

they are of course seized of what is happening overseas. Decisions being taken not only

by some of the countries you mentioned, but also the way in which the UK which is using



the AstraZeneca vaccine at a scale probably not seen in those other countries like Canada

and Europe that are that are relying more heavily on other vaccines. So I've the utmost

confidence in the TGA, in ATAGI, and in our chief medical officers, making sure they are

across all of the inputs not just here in Australia, but all of the evidence globally, and taking

into account very seriously what their equivalent authorities overseas are doing.



JOURNALIST: So at the end of the day, you actually don't agree with Queensland that the

international cap should be drastically reduced?



BUTLER: No, as I understand the reports from this morning, as I’ve read them, Premier

Palasczuk has asked for a temporary cut in the arrivals to Queensland as they deal not

only with the breakout in Brisbane, but they're taking the lion's share of hospitalisations

from PNG. So Queensland is dealing with a lot of the pressure at the moment. I think,

understandably, they would want to make sure that that pressure isn't increased while

they're still trying to get on an even keel. You’ve seen that in other states where there have

been outbreaks of one sort or another and every single state has had one over the last few

months that that state wants to slow down the supply of return travelers, while they make

sure that they've got things under  control. So I'm not surprised at all by Premier

Palasczuk’s comments.



What it does highlight though, is that we don't have these purpose built quarantine facilities

that people have been talking about now for some time, Toowoomba is is the classic

example.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



