Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

George Tambassis  President of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia

MEDIA RELEASE



31 January 2021



Community Pharmacy to join COVID-19 vaccine workforce

Community pharmacies around Australia are being invited to join the nation-wide effort to  administer the COVID-19 vaccine to millions of Australians over the coming months, as work  continues to protect more people from the deadly pandemic.

The Australian Government is committed to providing access to safe and effective vaccines  for COVID-19, and the distribution effort will be one of the largest logistical operations in our  country’s history.

An expression of interest (EOI) process will commence on 1 February 2021 for community  pharmacies around Australia to participate in the, “Community Pharmacy COVID-19  Vaccination Program,” to immunise priority populations from Phase 2a (expected from  May 2021) onwards of the Australian COVID-19 Vaccination rollout strategy.

Minister for Health and Aged Care Greg Hunt said, “Community pharmacy will be an  important partner in the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines.”

“Utilising the existing network of thousands of community pharmacies will ensure the general  population have broader access to COVID-19 vaccinations, provide choice in where the  community receive a vaccine, and address barriers to access some parts of rural and regional  Australia,” Minister Hunt said.

“Participation in the program will be voluntary and pharmacies will need to demonstrate they  meet the highest safety standards and have capacity and capability to deliver COVID-19  vaccines, as well as ensuring they continue to provide important services to their local  communities. These standards have been informed by the expert medical advice from the  Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI).”

The National President of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia, George Tambassis, said  community pharmacists across Australia welcomed the opportunity to be part of the  healthcare sector’s commitment to ensuring the maximum possible uptake of COVID-19  vaccinations.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



“Some 94 per cent of pharmacies are members of the pharmacy profession’s quality assurance  program, QCPP, and the robustness of this program underpins the sector’s ability to meet the  challenges of the pandemic and the delivery of COVID-19 vaccinations, while maintaining  the levels of service and medicine delivery critical to their role as frontline healthcare  professionals,” Mr Tambassis said.

“With a network of some 5.800 pharmacies across Australia, appropriately trained  pharmacists are ideally placed to provide the opportunities and access for Australians to  receive a COVID-19 vaccination.

“Our members are committed to helping protect communities in all areas of the country and,  as has been shown during all phases of this pandemic, will continue to go above and beyond  for their patients.

“The Guild looks forward to helping ensure the resources and skills of pharmacists are  recognised and quickly utilised in the COVID-19 vaccine rollout.”

An EOI process commenced recently for general practices to assist in the delivery of the  AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine, and community pharmacies will be another important  vaccination point for many communities.

Community pharmacies will be incentivised to provide both doses of the AstraZeneca  COVID-19 vaccine to Australians wishing to be vaccinated, to ensure maximum uptake of the  vaccine.

The Australian Government will continue to work with state and territory health authorities  and the health sector to finalise the locations for vaccine distribution.

All health professionals involved in the vaccination program will have undertaken specialised  training, which is currently in development. This training is expected to be rolled out from  early February.

Many of Australia’s community pharmacies are already critical in the delivery of the seasonal  influenza vaccines across the entire population, and their efforts in stepping up to support the  COVID-19 vaccine program will be important in ensuring wide accessibility and take up.

This will be the first time a national community pharmacy vaccination program will be rolled  out funded by the Commonwealth Government.

More information about the Governments COVID-19 Vaccine Strategy is available at  health.gov.au and the EOI will be issued from 1 February 2021.

The Government thanks the community pharmacy sector for their constructive engagement  and collaboration over recent months, in particular the Pharmacy Guild of Australia and the  Pharmaceutical Society of Australia.

ENDS

