TRANSCRIPT

Wednesday, 07 April 2021

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan interview with Michael Usher, Channel 7

SUBJECTS: Trans-Tasman bubble opening; Tourism Australia campaign.

Michael Usher: Well, for more on the Trans-Tasman bubble, I'm joined by the Tourism Minister, Dan  Tehan. Minister, good morning to you. Now, look, there’s no doubt our tourism sector's been in pain  for some time. Let’s drill down to it - if I run a restaurant in Cairns right now, am I going to be  relieved by this decision? Am I going to get Kiwi tourists quickly?

Dan Tehan: Absolutely you will, and we're going to help and do our part — we’re launching a $3  million advertising campaign in New Zealand this coming Thursday. We want to make sure that the  1.4 million New Zealanders who visit Australia each year will come back, and the $1.6 billion they  spend here in Australia will come back. And, as a matter of fact, we want to see more because we  know New Zealanders have got nowhere else to go, so we want to get them here to Australia in  record numbers, and get them spending record amounts of money.

And if they do that when they visit Cairns that means they'll be going out to the restaurants, they’ll  be going to the pubs, they'll be going out to the reef, they’ll be seeing all the wonderful attractions,  not only do we have in Cairns but right across this nation, and we're going to do our bit, we’re going  to be advertising in New Zealand, telling all those Kiwis: come here, come here and spend your  money and spend big.

Michael Usher: Minister, I’ve got some confidence on our side of the ditch, New South Wales,  Western Australia, Tasmania, for example, will remain open, not lock down a border too quickly to  tourists, as such, but what about on the other side? We know that in New Zealand, the Prime  Minister there has been very, very cautious and does lockdown just on one or two positive COVID  infections. Will that knock confidence, that it is a cautious reopening?

Dan Tehan: Well, obviously, they've taken their time to make this decision, and they wouldn't have  taken it if they didn’t think that this bubble is going to work. So, I've got a lot of confidence that this  will work, and that what we’re going to see is Australians going to New Zealand, but also a lot of  New Zealanders coming to Australia, and especially with the knowledge now, they know that they  won't have to do that two weeks quarantine when they return to New Zealand.

As I've said, I'm anticipating we can build on that 1.4 million Kiwis who come here every year and  spend $1.6 billion. And that's why we're backing it with a $3 million Tourism Australia advertising  campaign, which will start later this week.

Michael Usher: We’re going to need more than New Zealand though, just to reopen to tourism and  vice versa. What countries are you in talks with to set up a similar experience? Singapore, for  example?

Dan Tehan: So, New Zealand obviously is a great first step, but we do want to explore other options,  but we’ll have to do that consistent with the medical advice. I’ve had some discussions with my  Singaporean counterpart about whether we could build on the Australia-New Zealand travel bubble,  and get Singapore included in that, but we have to take our time and work through that. Obviously,  it’s dependent on the COVID situation in Singapore, here in New Zealand, as we work through things.  But I’m very keen over time to build on this. We want to see as many options for Australians to be

able to travel overseas as there are for people from overseas to be able to come here and visit the  wonderful destinations that we have here in Australia.

Michael Usher: Indeed. Alright. We’ll let you continue those talks with those other countries. Dan  Tehan, the Tourism Minister, thank you.

