

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE   MONDAY, 1 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Anti-vaxxers; Historical Sexual Assault Allegations.

SAMANTHA ARMYTAGE, HOST: The first 300,000 doses of the AstraZeneca  Coronavirus vaccine have arrived in Australia with the shots due to start rolling  out next Monday, pending TGA testing. But there are fears anti-vaxxers could  target vaccine hubs and storage facilities. Federal police and ASIO are a part of  a task force now investigating the anti-vaccination movement. Meanwhile, the  government also set up a myth-busting unit to instill confidence in the vaccines  and dispute bizarre claims including vaccines cause sterility - sterility - can  alter your DNA and that the 5g phone pulses will kill those who are vaccinated.  For their take, we're joined by Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce, and Labor MP,  Joel Fitzgibbon - morning Gents. Barnaby, the Health Minister's office was  targeted by anti-vaxxers on the weekend. Do you think the government will ever  get through to the anti-vaxxers - convince them it's safe and unnecessary, or  do you just sort of let that part of society go?

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Not without closing  down Byron Bay, no. Obviously people got to understand that if you decide not  to vaccinate, then you're relying on other people for herd immunity, you're  allowing anybody else to do the right thing. Are you got to accept  consequences if people die? You have your views, and there are a lot of people  who for very good reasons may decide not to. We're going to have to rely on  the rest of Australia to have the common sense to get vaccinated, so we can  get the herd immunity up.

ARMYTAGE: Yeah. Joel, I find it astounding, you know, we've all been sort of  hoping and praying for a vaccine for all of last year, and now it's here, and  we've got to put police and ASIO outside these facilities to protect the vaccines.  It's quite extraordinary, isn't it?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Yes, it is Sam. I just don't  understand it, quite frankly. I mean, if people don't want to take the vaccine  themselves, then fair enough, but why they would be running interference on  others receiving the vaccine when it's so important to our economy, and so  important to community health and, indeed, so important to saving lives. And,  you know, once upon a time, people used to protest about big issues - freedom  riots for indigenous rights, anti-Vietnam war, you know, workers' rights, eight  hour day, and all those sorts of things, and now they're protesting against  vaccination. I mean, these people are crazy. And to the extent to which they  break the law, they should have the book thrown at them.

ARMYTAGE: Yeah, that's a good point. We were just showing in the news,  what's going on in Myanmar where people are being shot with live rounds for  protesting democracy, fighting for their lives. And here we are in the luckiest  country in the world, so spoiled with this vaccine that can help us through this  pandemic, and people are trying to shut it down. It's extraordinary, isn't it?

Okay, moving on. The Prime Minister is under pressure to act over claims one  of his cabinet ministers is at the center of a historical rape allegation. Labor  says Scott Morrison needs to determine if it's appropriate for this minister to  remain in cabinet. Barnaby, what's happening here within the government?  Should this minister be stood down or do the police - this is with the police  now, isn't it?

JOYCE: First of all you have to excuse me, I'm holding this camera. There  seems to be a whole raft of allegations and counter allegations. First thing is,  okay, get them all out, and then give them to the police and to the court and not  to the media, or your colleagues to deal with. Because in those will be a  number of the truth and need to be dealt with. And they'll also be their fair  smattering of those that are lies, half-lies and wrap up incrimination. And that is  not as bad but also a blight. Secondly, once the courts and the police have  made their decision, remember if you decide to take their place, you're actually  affecting the decision either way, because even if they're guilty, they'll say, well,  they didn't get natural justice. And if they're not guilty, well, you've completely  defamed them. And then once the police and the court have made that  decision, then the parliament can go and do whatever it likes, ask all the  questions they want. The final thing I would say is if you are subject to an  allegation or you are the person making the allegation, let your solicitor do the  talking otherwise you can affect your rights at court.

ARMYTAGE: Yeah. Joel, I agree there. I don't like it when these things are  thrashed out through the media. This is a police investigation. It's now, you  know, it's been 18 years since I've worked in Canberra, so I'm way out of it.



And I don't want to join the chorus, but you know what's happening there - it's  now spread to Labor. How's Labor handling this? What should Anthony  Albanese do here?

FITZGIBBON: Well, the alleged Labor incident has only broken overnight. So, I  don't know what Labor is doing. But I mean, Scott Morrison is the only person  capable of determining whether the person accused on their side should or  should not stay in the Cabinet. I mean, the threshold for guilt in the criminal law  is a very high one - beyond reasonable doubt - it's a different threshold on  whether someone should stay in the Cabinet and the Prime Minister is the only  one capable of making that judgment and whatever decision he takes, it will be  tested and judged by others in the longer run.

ARMYTAGE: Yeah. All right. Gentlemen, thank you for your time this morning.  We do appreciate it.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock.









