Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

Senator Jim Molan AO DSC  Senator for New South Wales



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

14 January 2021

Government launches new headspace centre in Batemans Bay

Young people in Batemans Bay and surrounds will now have easier access to mental health  services with the opening of a new headspace centre today.

The new service was announced as a satellite service as part of the Australian Government’s  $111.3 million funding commitment to establish 30 new headspace services. Given the  particularly devastating impact of the bushfires on the New South Wales South Coast, the  Government announced the expansion of the service to a full centre in January 2020.

The new service is located at 1/11 Clyde Street, Batemans Bay.

Minister for Health, Greg Hunt, said young people have been affected significantly by the  impacts of the bushfires and COVID-19, and access to mental health services and support was  more important than ever.

“There are more pressures on young people today than ever before and the expansion of  headspace will be vitally important in providing services in Batemans Bay,” Minister Hunt  said.

“I am committed to ensuring young Australians can get information, advice, counselling or  treatment, when and where they need it.”

“headspace is here to deliver quality frontline support and ensure the best possible care for  people who are at risk. We know intervention at the earliest possible stage is important to  reduce the duration and impact of mental illness, so I encourage young people in our  community to reach out for the help they need.”

The headspace program aims to improve access for young people aged 12 to 25 years who  have, or are at risk of, mental illness.

One in four people aged 16 to 24 experiences some form of mental illness every year, and  three-quarters of all mental illness manifests in people under the age of 25.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





Senator for New South Wales, Jim Molan AO DSC, said Bateman’s Bay headspace would  offer early intervention services across four key areas - mental health, related physical health,  social and vocational support, and alcohol and other drug use.

“Bateman’s Bay headspace, like every headspace service, will provide tailored and holistic  mental health support, working closely with young people at a crucial time in their lives to  help get them back on track and strengthen their ability to manage their mental health in the  future,” Senator Molan said.

“Services are co-designed with young people to ensure they are relevant, accessible and  highly effective.”

The Government continues to demonstrate its firm commitment to the mental health and  wellbeing of all Australians, providing a record investment in mental health services and  support of an estimated $5.7 billion this year alone.

The headspace service has been commissioned by the South Eastern New South Wales  Primary Health Network and is designed to meet the needs of young people in Batemans Bay.

ENDS



