



Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services  Minister for Sport







Transcript: RN Breakfast with Fran Kelly, Wednesday 17 February.

Topics:  Vaccine roll out to aged care; Royal Commission final report.

E&EO…

Fran Kelly: The aged care sector is racing to prepare for the start of the COVID vaccine rollout  next week, with residents and workers at the front of the queue when vaccines are being  administered from Monday. The federal government's promised that half a million staff and  residents will get their jabs in the coming weeks, protecting a sector that has been hit hard by the  pandemic. Three out of four COVID deaths in this country, more than 600 of them linked to  aged care. The rollout will start the same week that the final report from the Aged Care Royal  Commission will be handed down, with calls for a major overhaul of the sector growing even  before its release.

Richard Colbeck is the Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services Minister,  welcome back to Breakfast.

Richard Colbeck: Morning, Fran.

Fran Kelly: You're expecting vaccinations to kick off at 240 aged care facilities next week. Is  the workforce ready to go from Monday?

Richard Colbeck: Yes, there's been considerable work that's been done with two providers  across the country to do in-reach into residential aged care, and 240 facilities will start next week  - in fact, from Monday. So we're looking to get the residents done initially and then we'll follow  up with staff members in those facilities.

Fran Kelly: Now, the timeline the government's put forward, I understand, is for the vaccine  rollout in aged care to take six weeks in total. There's 30,000 people due to be vaccinated next

week, which is a small slice of the half a million workers and residents in aged care to be  vaccinated in that six weeks. How are you going to manage that?

Richard Colbeck: Well, that's the first dose that we're intending to get done in that period of  time. Obviously, there's a three-week period between doses of the Pfizer vaccine, and some of  the residents and workforce will get the AstraZeneca vaccine. And, of course, the period that's  been recommended between doses for that is a little longer. But we're aiming to get the first dose  rolled out within that six-week period.

Fran Kelly: So to half a million workers and residents?

Richard Colbeck: That's right. So we've got Health Care Australia looking after New South  Wales and Queensland, and Aspen Medical will be looking after the other states and territories.  And the vaccine rollout will start, as I've said, in 240 facilities across all states, territories, metro  and regional from next Monday.

Fran Kelly: And how will the rollout happen? I understand people won't have to travel. They'll  get the vaccine from a trained - I don't know what we call that - vaccinator? How will that  process work in the aged care homes?

Richard Colbeck: So, we have in-reach going into every single provider. We've provided  information to each facility, detailed advice and checklists around what we will be seeking with  respect to consent, giving some advice with respect to clinical assessment of residents, providing  advice importantly to residents and families with respect to what they can expect. And of course,  the consent information is also important because, for some residents, it’ll be family members or  delegates who will be providing that consent, and so providing the information for them to be  able to make that decision in time is to be a very important part of the process

Fran Kelly: Okay. But you're saying it’s ready to go. What about the next stage? People who are  aged over 70 who don't live in residential aged care facilities, when will they get the vaccine?

Richard Colbeck: Well, they will commence as part of Phase 1b, and they will be able to go to  their GP, their pharmacy or state based clinic to receive their vaccine. And-

Fran Kelly: [Interrupts] From when?

Richard Colbeck: Well, that will be dependent on supply. And so that process, as we've always  said, is dependent on the ramping up of supply and availability of vaccine coming into the  country, and of course, the availability of the locally manufactured capacity. And we're very,  very fortunate that we've got that AstraZeneca capacity to manufacture here in Australia. And as  Minister Hunt announced this week, the first vials of that were bottled only in the last few days.

Fran Kelly: I'll come to that in a moment. But just in terms of those listening who are over 70,  who are living at home, might want to know a bit more. So what's your timeline? You must be  working to some timeline, Minister, for this rollout Phase 1b for older Australians?

Richard Colbeck: As I've said, Fran, that is that is dependent on the arrival of the vaccine in  Australia, and also the availability of the locally produced product. We don't have specific  timelines on that, we're talking early March. But as soon as we've got that availability we’ll be  letting people know process. The information will be going out to the doctors, pharmacies,  appropriate training, importantly, and of course, the availability through state based health clinics  and systems.

Fran Kelly: Okay. There's a lot of interest in who gets which vaccine, because the efficacy rates  from Pfizer generally, in general terms, better than the what the data shows for the AstraZeneca  vaccine - that's the one Australia will have the most of and will produce here. How many aged  care residents will get Pfizer? And how many will get AstraZeneca?

Richard Colbeck: Well, that'll depend on availability, and in some circumstances, location. So  the Pfizer vaccine will be based out of the specialised hubs that hold the vaccine at this -70-degree temperature. The AstraZeneca vaccine obviously can be refrigerated in a normal  circumstance, so there's a lot more flexibility in respect to that. Everyone will be offered a  vaccine, both vaccines are safe and they work. And so that's the important thing for us, to ensure  that everyone has the availability of a vaccine that is, a, safe, and has the appropriate efficacy.  And that's the process that we've been through with respect to the approval, to ensure that the  vaccines are both safe and that they work - and that's the process that's been approved by the  TGA.

Fran Kelly: Okay. But there are questions about do they work as well? I mean, the TGA has  signed off on AstraZeneca for people over 18, but says the decision to use it on elderly people  should be taken on a case by case basis. Here’s the head of the TGA, John Skerritt.

[Excerpt]

John Skerritt: Look at what doctors call futility. If someone only has a few weeks to live, you  don't give them a hip replacement and you may not give them a vaccine or a medicine. So that's  where we hinting at. But the vaccine is recommended for use in all ages.

[End of Excerpt]

Fran Kelly: So, that’s John Skerritt from the TGA saying it's recommended for people of all  ages. But the TGA’s notes say that the trials of AstraZeneca had, quote: an insufficient number  of participants infected by COVID-19 to conclusively determine the efficacy in the subgroup of  over 65s. So given that, why wouldn't we use the Pfizer supplies in Australia for those older  Australians?

Richard Colbeck: Well, the TGA wouldn't have approved it for all ages if it wasn't suitable, and  safe and efficacious for all ages. That's why they approved it. I think Professor Skerritt’s words  are very, very clear with respect to the considerations around whether to, or not to vaccinate - I  think his example was extremely clear. But they would not have approved for use in all ages if it  wasn't suitable for use in all ages.

Fran Kelly: As we're speaking, and this reflects the conversations I’m sure you're having all the  time, I would say people are concerned about which vaccine they get. Someone's asking to Phase  1b people - that's the older Australians who live outside aged care homes - will they get the  Pfizer? Are you telling us that that will be a mix of both? There's no one cohort will get one  vaccine?

Richard Colbeck: Well, that's effectively correct. The- Most people in Australia will get the  AstraZeneca vaccine because we have more doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine. We have 20  million doses of Pfizer at this stage. We have just under 54 million doses of AstraZeneca. If the  Novavax vaccine is approved by the TGA, some people will get that. That will all be part of our  ramp up. Most likely the Novavax will come in through the Phase 2b, but both Pfizer and  AstraZeneca will be utilised through Phase 1a and subsequent phases.

Fran Kelly: Okay. Vaccination of residential aged care workers remains voluntary, as it does for  all Australians. But some aged care providers, including Pat Sparrow from Aged Care  Community Services Australia, wants vaccine to become a workplace requirement in aged care.  Already, aged care workers, I think, have to have a flu jab. Why shouldn't they have to have a  COVID jab?

Richard Colbeck: Well, that's based on the evidence, and the AHPPC deliberately hasn't made a  recommendation with respect to the COVID vaccine because we don’t-

Fran Kelly: [Interrupts] No. But that’s not about evidence.

Richard Colbeck: Well, well, it is because we don't know yet whether it prevents transmission.  That's why we are vaccinating residents first, because they are the ones that are at risk and so  they are the first ones to get the vaccination. It's- the issue for us is understanding whether or not  the vaccine prevents transmission, which provides the barrier between the virus in the  community transmitting via the workforce to residents. So, we're starting with the residents  because they are the ones that are most at risk and then we’re working to-

Fran Kelly: [Interrupts] I understand that. But isn't there an issue that even, even with the  transmission question not answered about a vaccine - meaning people don't get as sick, therefore  the viral load isn't so extreme, therefore it would be safer to have them in a workplace? Isn't that  a safeguard we should be looking at?

Richard Colbeck: Well, forgive me for accepting the medical advice of the AHPPC rather than  the advice of the aged care sector lobby groups. That's the thing that's served us so well all the  way through this COVID pandemic - we've acted on the advice of the AHPPC, we will continue  to do that. That- the question of compulsory vaccination for aged care workers remains an open  question. We will continue to look at the evidence as it comes in.  We will- we have the  advantage of seeing what's happening in other countries, particularly in the UK, with respect to  the AstraZeneca vaccine and if that process demonstrates a prevention of transmission and a  protection through that process, that information will be considered by the AHPPC, the Age Care  Advisory Group, and then a recommendation will be made.

Fran Kelly: Alright. Minister, in terms of the Aged Care Royal Commission expected to hand  down its final report next week - now there's a coalition of aged care providers, we spoke to them  earlier in the week, saying the system is broken after years of, quote: piecemeal, ad hoc  bandages. It says providers need better regulation and better resourcing. Do you accept a major  overhaul of the sector is required and that will include much higher funding? The sector's talking  about $20 billion more a year.

Richard Colbeck: Well, I think the prime minister, when he called the royal commission,  indicated that there’ll be additional resources required - I think we understand that. But it’s-

Fran Kelly: [Interrupts] In that order? Of that order?

Richard Colbeck: But it's not just about money. Very significant reform required, in my view,  to the sector. I think you can see, from Counsel Assisting’s recommendations to the  commissioners that were released before Christmas, that they are clearly heading in that  direction. We are now a week and a half away from the final report. We will very, very carefully  consider the recommendations of the royal commission. We've done a considerable amount of  work ourselves in preparation for that process. And the aged care sector will undergo significant  reform off the back of the royal commission process.

Fran Kelly: And just finally, Minister, on the rape allegations levelled by a former staffer who  worked for Minister Linda Reynolds. Have you taken steps in your office to ensure that all staff  are treated with appropriate respect? And if someone came to you with a serious complaint, how  would you handle it?

Richard Colbeck: Yes. In fact, I gathered all my staff in all my offices, and those that couldn't  be in the office because of the restrictions in Victoria, yesterday together to talk them through  these issues. I have to say my heart sank for Britney when I heard what had occurred to her and  her circumstances. The fact that she's being having, having panic attacks when coming to  Parliament House indicates to me that she's not in a good way and I'm very, very concerned for  her welfare. And my concern is that the workplace in my office is one that's respectful and where  workers feel safe, all my staff feel safe; and if they have something that they need to come and  talk to me about, the door's open to do that and that's what I told them yesterday.

Fran Kelly: Richard Colbeck, thank you very much for joining us.

Richard Colbeck: Thanks very much, Fran.

Fran Kelly: Richard Colbeck is the Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services.

ENDS





Aaron Langmaid | Senior Media Adviser  OFFICE OF SENATOR THE HON. RICHARD COLBECK  Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services

Minister for Sport



P: 02 6277 7720 | M: 0456 889 018



