

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC MORNINGS CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY 17 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Brittany Higgins’ story; government’s refusal to outline a plan for

JobKeeper and JobSeeker post-March.



ADAM SHIRLEY, HOST: Brittany Higgins alleges, she was raped by a colleague in the

Parliament House Office of Minister Linda Reynolds in March, 2019. She is concerned she has

not received the support and the care she needed from the Liberal Party. Prime Minister Scott

Morrison has pledged to review the culture of the Parliament in the wake of this issue and

asked his colleague, Celia Hammond MP to oversee the investigation. But that has generated

some criticism that instead of a Liberal figure investigating a Liberal Party and Parliament

problem, an independent authority should be in charge to assess what is wrong and how it can

be put right, and questions remain about what senior ministers knew, and when they knew it,

about what happened to Brittany Higgins. This is Australia's previous Prime Minister Malcolm

Turnbull on ABC News breakfast earlier this morning



FORMER PRIME MINISTER MALCOLM TURNBULL: Why I, I find it incredible. That's to say:

very, very, very hard to believe that the Prime Minister's office would not have been aware of

that incident as soon as that occurred, and would not have been aware of the complaints that

Brittany was making. I mean if they weren't, it was a complete failure of the system. Now, so

that's the first point. As to when Scott Morrison was told, you know, sometimes the staff in a

prime minister's office will use discretion as to what they tell their boss, and when they tell it to

him or her. So ultimately that's really something only the people involved can answer but, you

know, an incident like this, you know, major security breach, a very distressed young woman

found there in the awful circumstances, then she complains that she's been raped. I mean I

find it inconceivable that that wasn't well known to at least key members of the Prime Minister's

staff.



SHIRLEY: Former Prime Minister of Australia Malcolm Turnbull on ABC News Breakfast

earlier today ABC Canberra morning's has requested an interview with Senator for the ACT,

and Assistant Minister, Zed Seselja on this issue today. He's unavailable for an interview this

morning. Senator Katy Gallagher is Labor Senator for the ACT, and Shadow Minister for

Finance and the Public Service. Senator Gallagher thank you very much for your time.

Speaking with us on mornings today



SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE: Morning.



SHIRLEY: How safe are women at Parliament House?



GALLAGHER: Well clearly there's a problem and I think there's two issues here that need to

be focused on. One is of course the appalling situation that Brittany Higgins has experienced

here, but the second issue is the one you raise which is this workplace, and how safe it is for

anyone who works here but particularly women. We've had a series of concerns raised over

the last year, from women in different situations but all of them, experiencing either poor, poor

behaviour, repercussions for raising issues or in Brittany Higgins' case the allegations of a

serious crime occurring here. And to date, it hasn't been dealt with properly and that's what

needs to change. I think women in this building are incredibly angry that it's come to this, but

we need to make sure that we put in place measures that keep people safe here, it's clearly a

problem and it needs to be responded to.



SHIRLEY: Can you put more words that anger. How hot is that anger Senator?



GALLAGHER: Look, I think if you talk to any woman they will have some experience of either

sexual harassment or some other kind of experience in the workplace like you'd be hard

pressed to ask any woman that hadn't experienced something in the workplace at some point

in her career. And I think what's happened in the last year with allegations previously about, a

series of affairs in Liberal offices and then what Ms Higgins' case has brought to light is, I think

it either reminded people of experiences they've had or experiences they're going through so

the women I've spoken to in this building and it's across political lines and it's in non-political

jobs, find it pretty tough I think. And I think from people my age, there's sort of is it still like why

can't we deal with this and why can't we change it and why can't we ensure that women are

treated appropriately in the workplace?



SHIRLEY: Have you, or any woman that you know, ever felt threatened or at risk of Parliament

House?



GALLAGHER: Not for me. I haven't, but I acknowledge that I'm in quite a senior position in

this building. So, I think there's a different - there's different issues at play here. And I think for

someone in Ms Higgins' position, she was a young woman starting a career. I think the

pressures on her are different to the ones that I would be exposed to. So I acknowledge that. I

don't say that that's appropriate but I acknowledge that. No one specifically has come to me

but, you know, this building talks and you hear things about people, whether it's being in social

situations or in bullying situations or positions with disproportionate power situations. I think

you'd be hard pressed, again, to find someone that didn't know, or hadn't heard some story of

difficulty in this workplace and I think part of it is that it's not like other workplaces here, but that

shouldn't stop us from making sure that we should be the best workplace in the country - not

one which the rest of Australia looks at and shakes their head.



SHIRLEY: And if all taxpayers contribute to its running, the people that inhabit it, that work

there in the main of those who hold representative positions, why is it a workplace that in your

words, a lot of Australians and Canberrans look at and shake their head?



GALLAGHER: Yeah, well, I mean I would say that, I think the vast majority of people that work

in this place do the right thing - come to work, do their job, treat people respectfully, work hard,

go home. So I think the problem is there are clearly gaps in our processes and systems, which

allow poor behaviour poor conduct and, in Miss Higgins' case, allegations of serious crime

occurring, to occur without the necessary protections for individuals and that's what's got to

change. So, I don't want people to think that this is widespread but what has occurred, and I

think over the last year, it's whether it's been Four Corners, or the case that's been raised this

week. It's shown that there are problems here, and where there are problems, there's a

responsibility to fix it and the fix shouldn't be some political fix. It's got to be a serious,

independent, honest look at what's happening, where the problems are. And responses to that,

and that's what we've been calling for.



SHIRLEY: Senator Gallagher, Moring spoke yesterday to Trish Bergin. She was former Head

of the Office for Women for the federal government. This is a snapshot of what she had to say

Do you reckon the Prime Minister gets it?



TRISH BERGIN, FORMER HEAD OF OFFICE FOR WOMEN: I think he's starting to but I do

feel that, and this is a personal view, I do feel that he is sometimes quite blind to it and deaf to

it. So I think it is time that, and I get the sense now just listening to the way he's talking that

that he realises that this is something that is happening as much as he may wish it wasn't. And

he needs to, you need to lead in in responding to it.



SHIRLEY: Senator Gallagher, do you think both the male leaders of Australia's two major

parties get it?



GALLAGHER: I work more closely with Anthony Albanese, obviously, than the Prime Minister

and so I can very clearly say that Mr Albanese gets it, and in fact wrote to the Prime Minister

last year asking for a proper process to be put in place to make sure that women feel

supported in this workplace. I'm not sure there was a response to that letter. So absolutely,

and we've been doing a lot of work across the federal party to make sure that we have in place

systems and processes that support women. Listening to the Prime Minister yesterday and,

you know, perhaps I'm a bit angry about it all this week but I've felt that - and I hope I'm wrong

- but I did feel like there was an effort to manage the situation politically rather than a serious

attempt to address what is clearly a problem in this workplace. I hope I'm wrong. I think we

need an independent bipartisan review. It needs to be clearly looking at how we can ensure

that there are independent processes for women to go to if they are in the position that Miss

Higgins found herself in to pursue a complaint. Because there was clearly a very serious

breakdown in services and support for Mr Higgins when she went through what she went

through two years ago and indeed is still going through today.



SHIRLEY: The Prime Minister Scott Morrison has sought Labor's assistance in the review. Are

you considering playing role?



GALLAGHER: I think there'll be further discussions between Mr Albanese and the Prime

Minister about that. Our position is we want it to be bipartisan, we want it to be truly

independent, we don't want it to be a sort of a political PR management exercising, and then

next week everything's fine and we go off on our own. Again, I think we need to make sure that

what's put in place is truly independent. I think what the Prime Minister announced yesterday,

Ms Hammond, if she's to do some work within the Liberal Party that's fine and good, but I think

we definitely need a more independent process than perhaps was outlined yesterday which is

what Mr Albanese has been calling for.



SHIRLEY: I do want to ask further about that. Is the Member for Curtin Celia Hammond the

correct person to lead a review into workplace culture and safety at Parliament House but also

within the Liberal Party?



GALLAGHER: Well I think if she's confined to within the Liberal Party, I think that's fine. As

women in the Labor Party, we've been looking at our systems and processes too, to make

sure, not just women there's been men involved, of course, in making sure our internal

processes are better because clearly there was an internal breakdown for the government in

relation to Ms Higgins - not just at a government level but certainly at the party level as well. So

there's clearly issues that need to change that and we already knew that from Four Corners

and other allegations. It's a shame they didn't do this last year when it was raised as an issue

but if [Ms Hammond] does that that's fine, but I think what needs to happen for serious buy-in

and for people to believe that this is about serious change, it really needs to be a truly

independent arrangement being put in place.



SHIRLEY: This was from Nicola read this text regarding the situation of Parliament House: "If

female politicians complain about the culture they cannot expect respectful dealings from their

colleagues what chance do young women have in these lopsided power, working

relationships? They can have all the reviews into the workplace on the hill, but the political

machines or parties will not allow these changes because it doesn't suit them. Until women

support other women, nothing will change. Change is not really in the best interest of powerful

men, is it?"  In conclusion, do you have a response to the tenor of Nicole's text there, Senator

Gallagher?



GALLAGHER: I think it goes to what I raised with you earlier, Adam, about how angry people

feel and how cynical people are when, here we are in 2021, and we're still talking about how to

treat women respectfully in the workplace. And I get that and I feel it as well. But I would also

say that there are a lot of good people not just women and men who find what the allegations

that Ms Higgins has raised abhorrent and sickening, and who are concerned and want to make

sure that women feel safe, or everyone feels safe in this workplace but in particular women.

And I think change can happen. Yes, she is right that we need political will. And I think if

anything, Ms Higgins' case has bought that need for political will and political commitment right

to the pointy end and I think there will be change from this but we've got to stay on it and make

sure it's the right change and that it puts in place the right supports for women.



SHIRLEY: One other aspect to this issue, the Prime Minister yesterday referenced the

discussion he had with his wife, who pointed out to him that he needs to think about this case,

as if it were one of his daughters. There has been a lot of criticism around that aspect of it. Is it

fair that the Prime Minister references his wife, his children, helping inform his view here, and

that Ms Higgins, is a human being, and that purely the fact that a human is allegedly suffering

here and that should be enough to get someone to take action. Your sentiment on that?



GALLAGHER: Yeah, well I share a lot of the criticism that was raised yesterday. Women are

not just daughters and sisters and wives and aunts, they are individuals in their own right, and

the allegations of a serious crime occurring, I would have hoped that the leader of the country

when hearing those allegations didn't need to refer to another woman to be guided through

about how they should respond. And it's not the first time this Prime Minister uses his family at

particular times, I think which reflect poor judgment. Of course you internally think about things

about how would you feel. When you're trying to understand how Ms Higgins would feel you do

reflect internally, but I think the first response should be as the leader of the country, the leader

of the party that this occurred in and reflecting on how he would feel if it happened to his

daughter as opposed to how he feels because it happened to one of his staff was unfortunate.



SHIRLEY: I mean do you reference your family though when you think about policy, when you

think about decisions, when you think about empathy?



GALLAGHER: Well, as I said, I think everybody does. When you're thinking about anything at

work,  you can't sort of distance yourself from your own experience, and things that matter to

you, I mean I think that's quite difficult. But, I think a Prime Minister in a press conference

responding to allegations that a member of his staff was raped on the couch of his Defence

Minister, or Defence Industry Minister at the time, is serious enough in its own right, even at a

human to human level, let alone boss to a staff level to respond without having to reflect that if

it was his daughters he would feel the need to do something. He should have felt the need to

do something anyway.



SHIRLEY: There's another issue I do want to touch on before we're done for today though,

Senator Gallagher, if that's okay. JobKeeper and JobSeeker have been an essential financial

lifeline to a lot of people through COVID-19, but things are scaling back and will be wound

down in the coming weeks. This, just on Monday from Craig Wallace who's the acting CEO of

ACOSS the ACT Council of social services:



CRAIG WALLACE, CEO ACOSS: Nobody has been able to show how you can live on $40 a

day in a city like Canberra. If you do the math on rent and food and clothing, on keeping a car

running, on maintaining heating, you simply cannot make it work.



SHIRLEY: Senator Katy Gallagher, many people are back in work, the jobs market in many

industries is improving. Isn't it time to wind back some of those supports that have been

essential through COVID times?



GALLAGHER: Well, we're really worried about the timing of this. There's still about 3 million

Australians who are relying on either JobKeeper or JobSeeker at the elevated level to get

through week by week. There's thousands of people in Canberra who are relying on one of

those two payments. So we believe the government should be telling us, well we actually think

it's beyond time that the government should be outlining what they plan to do post- the end of

March. We're down to about 40 days or so until people's incomes are either stopped or wound

right down, and we still don't have an answer from the government about what they're going to

do to either replace that or target those payments better and it's causing a lot of angst. I'm

getting people talking to me about it either concerned about JobSeeker or JobKeeper. I was

out at a business last week where the woman involved she's a travel agent, Lisa from a  travel

agent in Manuka that said she will let her staff go - there is no income, there is no job, there is

no work, and that's not going to change for the foreseeable future. So clearly something needs

to happen and I can't for the life of me think why the government's holding out on explaining

what they plan to do



SHIRLEY: Are there particular industries or areas which could be targeted for further

assistance, whilst other industries maybe deserve to have some supports wound back

because they're back on their feet.





GALLAGHER: Sure, that's exactly right, that's what we've been saying all along, I mean some

businesses have not only continued going in the pandemic, they've done incredibly well in the

pandemic, so it is very patchy and it is very industry related. I was speaking to live events

people last week as well - their business is completely shattered and got no real sign that in

the next six months it'll be able to come back. There's arts, entertainment tourism, aviation,

travel, to some degree, depending where you are, hospitality, as well, and accommodation

services depending on where you are, so there are clearly significant industries, employing

millions of Australians that aren't going to snap back to life as usual on in April. It's just not

going to happen. And the government should be outlining what they plan to do. This

government never really wanted to go with JobKeeper, remember they tried a whole range of

interventions at the beginning of the pandemic.



SHIRLEY: There are different perspectives on that side.



GALLAGHER: Well there were two economic packages before they got to JobKeeper,

basically as the crisis was unfolding. And I accept it was unclear about the economic impact of

the pandemic, but they sort of put in place a whole range of economic measures before a

wage subsidy program. I don't think their natural affinity is to support a wage subsidy program

and I think that's the issue now - they're trying to say well we want to end it because we don't

want it to continue, but they're not saying to people whose livelihoods and businesses and, in

some instances, housing, you know relies on some sort of Lifeline post- the end of March.



SHIRLEY: Senator Katy Gallagher, it's significant the issues that we're canvassing today and

thank you for your time.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224



