

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PODCAST INTERVIEW

POLITICS WITH MICHELLE GRATTAN

MONDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Holding the Government to account; possibility of a Federal Election;

JobKeeper; JobSeeker; industrial relations; climate change; Labor Shadow Ministry

reshuffle; economic recovery.



MICHELLE GRATTAN, HOST: Anthony Albanese has had a rough start to 2021, the serious

car accident and speculation about the future of his leadership. He’s hoping for some reset

from the frontbench reshuffle he undertook last week which saw Chris Bowen replace Mark

Butler as spokesman on Climate and Energy. And at least this week’s Newspoll brought some

encouragement, showing the Coalition and Labor commencing the year 50-50 on the two-party

vote. The Opposition Leader joins us today. Anthony Albanese, your reshuffle didn’t quell the

leadership talk. Did you expect it to?



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: I was determined

to do the right thing. The advice that I had of some people before the reshuffle was you don’t

make changes. If you don’t make changes, no one can complain. But that’s not the right thing.

The right thing to do is to put in place the team with the right people in the right jobs in the lead

up to the election. And that contrasts with Scott Morrison’s reshuffle that he talked up when

Mathias Cormann was leaving the Parliament and which left Angus Taylor in place, left Stuart

Robert, the person who presided over the Robodebt debacle in place, Melissa Price, still there

in charge of defence procurement when we have real issues with the subs. Made no changes

of any substance. So I did the right thing by the Labor Party and that is making sure that we

maximise our potential to win the next election.



GRATTAN: Now, COVID obviously made things extraordinarily difficult for oppositions last

year. But even allowing for that, have you been surprised at the extent of angst within the

Labor Party, given that Federal Labor is polling not too badly? Obviously on a two-party basis,

the latest poll has you 50/50.



ALBANESE: Well, I reject the premise of the question. The fact is that overwhelmingly my

colleagues and the Caucus is focused on holding the Government to account, on putting

forward constructive suggestions and developing a clear alternative at the next election. That’s

overwhelmingly what people are focused on.



GRATTAN: Do you accept that Labor’s primary vote, around 36 per cent, is too low? And what

can you do to get that up?



ALBANESE: Well, I want it to be 100 per cent, Michelle. But it’s worth saying that that’s three

per cent higher than it was at the last election. And if anyone thinks that if we get three per

cent higher primary vote across the board, we won’t win the next election, then they’re wrong.

The fact is that we, of course, need to continue to work on that. But it’s heading in the right

direction. And one of the things that we’ll continue to argue for is that this is a do-nothing

Government. We’re seeing today the Prime Minister give a speech at the National Press Club

where once again, there’s no reform, no plan for the economy or for social policy. We still don’t

have an energy policy. No plan to deal with the challenges of the future. We’ll continue to hold

the Government to account. During 2020, we put forward practical ideas and policies such as

wage subsidies, support for mental health programs, including telehealth, the issue of the

vaccine, issues of quarantine and our borders, the need to have a plan to deal with aged care.

We put forward all of those suggestions, some of which were adopted by the Government,

such as wage subsidies, the increase in unemployment benefits. It’s not like we weren’t

focused on policy, we were. It’s just that we were focused on the immediate needs. And that’s

what the Australian people expected of us. We were constructive. And that stands in stark

contrast to the attitude of the Coalition during the Global Financial Crisis. And that will put us in

good stead at the next election. And what we need as well now, and we’ve started to do that,

as I said we would on your podcast when I became Leader, when we received the review of

the election defeat last time around, that we would have more strategy and less tactics, we

would roll out our policies from the time of the Budget Reply. Now, that Budget Reply was

delayed but we certainly did that with major child care reform, a major initiative, building on just

as Labor made universal healthcare through Medicare, universal superannuation, universal

provision of child care. Working towards that is a major economic reform and, as well, a Future

Made in Australia, recognising that whilst the pandemic has shown the strength of Australian

society and the strength of people being prepared to look after each other, it’s also exposed

some of the underlying economic weaknesses, our lack of economic resilience, our need to

actually be able to manufacture more things for ourselves, the weakness that’s there in the

labour market to increase casualisation and all of those present opportunities for Labor to

present clear alternatives at the next election. We’ve done some of that. We’ll be doing more of

that in coming weeks and months.



GRATTAN: They’ve obviously become increasingly frustrated with the criticisms by Joel

Fitzgibbon. But do you at least agree with him that labour, L-A-B-O-U-R, needs to be put back

into the Labor Party?



ALBANESE: The Labor Party has never walked away from looking after working people.

We’ve been around for some 130 years. We are Australia’s oldest and proudest political party.

And I reject the idea that we don’t look after working people. The last Labor Government got

rid of WorkChoices and put in place reforms in the interests of working people. What we’re

advancing now in terms of child care is about working people as well. Workers these days

aren’t all blue-collar males. They are women, they’re men, they’re young people, they’re older

workers. You’ve seen the economy transition and we need modern solutions, we’ll continue to

do that. But Labor will always stand up for the interests of working people.



GRATTAN: Do you think it’s possible that Joel Fitzgibbon might leave the Labor Party, join the

crossbench?



ALBANESE: Look, no, I think that Joel Fitzgibbon’s actions will speak. People will make their

own judgement about the role that he’s playing and whether he’s trying to be constructive or

not.



GRATTAN: But you don’t think he’d jump?



ALBANESE: People will make their own decisions. Joel has said himself he made the

decision some time ago, just after the last election, that he would stay on the frontbench for 18

months. And we had discussions about the timing of his departure. He chose to depart in a

way that was different from what he had indicated to myself as Leader and to others over a

long period of time. And people will make their own judgement about that. I mean, the Coalition

have Barnaby Joyce, have Craig Kelly, they’ve just knocked off Kevin Andrews, the longest

serving member of the House of Representatives. They have a whole range of people on their

side who are out of step with the mainstream opinion on the LNP side. The difference is that

Labor, when we’ve had an issue, we’ve dealt with it. We’ve intervened into the New South

Wales and the Victorian branch whilst I’ve been Leader, making necessary reforms and made

those branches stronger as a result. Scott Morrison’s just sitting back watching the sort of

chaos that’s seen, frankly, Kevin Andrews humiliated after a long period of time in the

Parliament.



GRATTAN: The coronavirus supplement stops at the end of March when JobSeeker would

return to the old level. The base, at the moment, for JobSeeker is $565 a fortnight and the

supplement currently is $150 a fortnight. What level do you think the ongoing JobSeeker

should be struck at?



ALBANESE: Well, what we say is that it should be more. That $40 a day isn’t enough to live

on, the Government acknowledged that. We’re not in a position to change the level of

JobSeeker in April and we’re not going to let the Government off the hook. We’re going to

continue to say that they should not be reducing JobSeeker to $40 a day because they

themselves have acknowledged that this drives people into poverty.



GRATTAN: This is not a complicated policy issue to nominate what you think would be a

reasonable level.



ALBANESE: There are costings that are required of that process.



GRATTAN: You could make them.



ALBANESE: We could make things up, Michelle, but I don’t want to do that, just make things

up without proper costings and without proper processes. And I haven’t done that. We will be

in a position, I would hope, to make changes to a whole range of policies after the next election

when we’re in a position to form Government. But what we’ve said under my leadership very

early on was that $40 a day wasn’t enough to live on. That was acknowledged by the

Government that was the case.



GRATTAN: You mentioned Scott Morrison’s speech today in which he’s very optimistic about

Australia’s economic recovery. Are you as optimistic?



ALBANESE: Well, one of the things that I wouldn’t do, what Scott Morrison said today, and

Josh Frydenberg has been saying as well, is that everything is all hunky dory. The fact is that a

whole lot of people have been left behind during the pandemic. So, yes, some people have

done well, some businesses have done well. They’ve not only received JobKeeper, they’ve

had their profits increased and been able to give big bonuses to corporate representatives. But

other people are really struggling and people who are in casual employment didn’t receive any

JobKeeper payments. They were the first ones to be laid off. And you have around about two

million Australians today are either unemployed or want more work than they’re getting.

They’re being left behind. A whole lot of people are struggling to pay their rent or to pay their

mortgage. And a whole lot of other people, because of problems with the labour market, are

really doing it tough. The costs of child care are something like four or five times the increase

this year than the inflation rate. You have circumstances whereby in some cases people

working, doing the same job in the mining sector, some will be earning around about 30 per

cent or in some cases more, less than their counterparts simply because of the use of labour

hire. There are people in the gig economy who are basically working for third-world conditions.

There’s no minimum rates for them and they’re being left outside the system. Now, some

people choose and it’s convenient for them and will continue to use new technology. And that’s

not a bad thing at all. But some people who are in the case of people driving around on

bicycles, delivering food and other products to people, have seen a considerable loss of life

because they have to take risks because they’re not being paid enough to get by. When you

have all those sorts of issues, I think that Scott Morrison as the leader of the nation should

speak up on behalf of those people who need assistance and are struggling, not just those

people who’ve done well.



GRATTAN: Do you think JobKeeper should go beyond the end of March when it’s due to end?



ALBANESE: I think for some sectors that are needing of support, if the logic of wage subsidies

was to keep relationships between employers and employees so as to avoid businesses failing

and workers being unemployed, then if those circumstances are still there, why would you

prematurely withdraw support?



GRATTAN: Which sectors?



ALBANESE: So, areas, for example, like the tourism sector that are continuing to struggle,

particularly in sectors that are reliant upon international tourism like far north Queensland.



GRATTAN: Now, obviously, climate policy was much talked about during your reshuffle with

the move of Mark Butler and Chris Bowen being the new spokesman. What difference do you

think this move will make?



ALBANESE: Well, Chris Bowen is a former Treasurer. He will focus, as he has already, you’ve

seen him focus not on diminution of our commitment to action on climate change, but

emphasising, for example, that Deloitte Access Economics says that 250,000 jobs will be

created by moving, over coming decades, by moving to net zero emissions by 2050, and that,

by contrast, hundreds of thousands of jobs will be lost if we don’t act on climate change. It’s

that link that I’ve continued to say since my time as the Environment and Climate Change

spokesperson under Kim Beazley, I argued that action on climate change was good for jobs

and good for the economy. The policies that were put in place under the Rudd and Gillard

Governments that I developed in Kim Beazley’s Blueprint we published in 2006 were

significant, such as, the most important of which, was the 20 per cent renewable energy target

by 2020, at the time opposed by the Coalition, questioned by a whole lot of people, including

some people in the Labor Party. The fact is that was the right thing to do that helped create

jobs, not just directly in terms of the renewable sector, but also in terms of reducing costs of

energy for the manufacturing sector.



GRATTAN: So, this move, does it represent a change of substance or a change in how the

substance is presented?



ALBANESE: Well, the Labor party policy is decided by the Labor Party, not by an individual

spokesperson. And the Labor Party believes in climate change and that it’s real and that by

acting, you produce more jobs, lower emissions and lower energy prices. The Labor Party is

very consistent on that. And we’ve been consistent on it for a long period of time since we

advocated well before we, of course, signed up to the Kyoto Protocol. But we argued, of

course, for ratification. And that was the first action of the Rudd Government in December

2007. So, we’re absolutely committed to action across the board. And I’ve seen some

commentary that says that a member of the New South Wales right wing grouping somehow

won’t take action on the environment. Well, Graham Richardson, Bob Carr, Tony Burke were

three outstanding advocates for our natural environment and for action. They all have a proud

record of achievement in that area. Chris Bowen’s absolutely committed to strong action. And I

think he will do an outstanding job.



GRATTAN: You’ve justified waiting to produce a climate policy on the grounds that a lot is

happening this year. Now, that includes the Glasgow Climate Conference towards the end of

the year. If we don’t have an election this year, will you delay announcing your policy until next

year?



ALBANESE: Look, we’ll make our policy announcements at the appropriate time. They

probably won’t be, with due respect, on a podcast. There’ll be a full-scale press conference for

all to see and to assess. But it’s not like we’ve delayed policy announcements, Michelle. I have

very clearly stated in one of my earliest speeches and policy announcements as Leader, net

zero emissions by 2050, and that we would act consistently with that. We have argued, and I

wrote to the Prime Minister before I addressed the National Press Club in the middle of last

year, saying that we supported a mechanism to drive change through the economy and that

that should be a bipartisan mechanism and then people could disagree on what the ambition

was within it. But we’ve done our best to try to be constructive. But we’ve made it very clear

that we will be ambitious when it comes to climate change. We’ve made specific policy

announcements as well, opposing the changes and the attempts by this Government to get rid

of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. And we announced in the Budget Reply last year

the Rewiring the Nation policy. Now, that was a $20 billion fund to be made available to make

sure that you fix transmission in this country. And what the, all the experts, the Australian

energy market operator, no less, and all of the major energy companies say is that would

address the major challenge because what that would enable it to do is for the renewables

sector, which is, the problem there is one of storage and reliability to be a part of the grid, to

operate more effectively, which would, of course, assist the renewable sector. Now, because

that wasn’t couched in terms of a percentage or what have you, maybe it didn’t receive the

focus of something like the net zero emissions by 2050. But that was a very, very significant

announcement. And indeed, the most significant thing that could be done according to the

energy sector itself.



GRATTAN: One policy you are going to announce soon is on industrial relations. Now

obviously you’re not going to be revealing the detail of that today. But can you just tell me,

what are the topic headings, as it were, that you’ll concentrate on, the priorities?



ALBANESE: The priorities are very much on job security and income security. The fact that

workers currently feel vulnerable, that if you’re in insecure work, that means you have difficulty

getting a mortgage. It means you have difficulty planning for your first child or future children. It

means that businesses suffer because they don’t have the certainty either of people being able

to spend money and keep that flow, which then flows on to the economy. So that’s a big

challenge. The wage stagnation that has been there since 2013, we have never seen, since

records were kept, wages being so constrained as they are. We need to deal with people who

are insecure in work, in the workforce, whether that be people who work in labour hire

companies and are working next door to someone doing the same tasks but earning less

money, whether it be people in the new gig economy who are sometimes working for almost

nothing in some cases, whether it be issues of workers who are having to bid against each

other. And that’s one of the things we’re seeing as to areas like the NDIS. Workers are being

essentially putting in a bid to provide services, but the lowest cost is the successful bidder.

Now, that puts a real downward pressure on wages but also in the delivery of the services and

the quality of that service delivery.



GRATTAN: The issue of insecure work will be a centrepiece of this policy?



ALBANESE: It will be front and centre because that’s a big challenge. And that’s something at

the same time as, what Scott Morrison’s solution? Well, we know they’ve produced legislation

last year which would cut wages and conditions.



GRATTAN: Will you vote against that legislation?



ALBANESE: We’ve said we will not vote for any legislation that cuts wages or cuts conditions

such as penalty rates.



GRATTAN: So you will vote against it in the Senate?



ALBANESE: We will try to, of course, amend legislation and then we’ll make decisions. Labor

will always stand up for working people and their wages and conditions.





GRATTAN: Well, it will be a lively industrial relations debate in the next few weeks.



ALBANESE: It certainly will be. And that will be a major focus of Labor, which is consistent

with the approach that I’ve always held and my Labor team holds.



GRATTAN: Anthony Albanese, thank you very much for talking with us today.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



