

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

TOWNSVILLE

THURSDAY, 14 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Disaster preparation; Regional Economies; COVID-19 recovery;

JobKeeper; COVID-19 Vaccines.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: I’m really pleased to be back in Townsville in North

Queensland once again to talk with Queensland Fire and Emergency Services about the disaster

season response and preparation, and also with the mayor and others about whether or not we can

better target Federal support for the local economy as we emerge from this deep and damaging

recession.



I wanted to begin by thanking Steve Barber and his colleagues at QFES not just for the opportunity

to tour the facilities today and to get a really useful briefing from him and his colleagues earlier on

this morning, but most of all, for the work that he and his team do making sure that we can keep as

many Queenslanders safe as possible, as we prepare for, respond to, and recover from what is

going to be and what is already an incredibly difficult disaster season. Something like 60 per cent of

Australia’s natural disasters occur here in our state of Queensland. There are remarkably

professional people doing a lot of work to prepare and respond and recover and I wanted to really

pay tribute to all of them for the work that they do here in Queensland.



We would like to see the Federal Government take disaster mitigation more seriously. We have

heard announcement after announcement of one fund or another fund from the Federal

Government, but not a cent has been spent out of the last two funds that they’ve announced when

it comes to disaster mitigation. Failing to prepare more adequately at the federal level for disasters

here in North Queensland leaves people vulnerable. The Federal Government’s inaction on

disaster mitigation means that people in North Queensland, Queensland more broadly, and around

the country are more vulnerable to natural disasters than they need to be. We’ve seen

announcement after announcement but true to form, not enough delivery, not a single cent spent

out of those last two funds that they’ve announced. For the second fund that they announced

applications don’t even close until after the main part of this disaster season and that obviously

leaves people vulnerable as well. It’s going to be a very difficult disaster season; there’s going to be

a lot of uncertainty for people in this community and around Australia.



But that’s not the only kind of uncertainty that people are confronting. On the economic front there

are a whole range of issues, whether it’s the global situation, our relationship with China, whether

it’s keeping a lid on outbreaks of the virus, whether it’s the timing of the deployment of the vaccine

when it’s available, uncertainty around the withdrawal of government support for the economy and

also whether or not people will be spending down their savings. All of these things are sources of

considerable uncertainty, as we enter 2021.



We call on the Federal Government to make sure that their economic support in local economies

like this one is tailored and responsive to what is actually going on in the ground. Yes, the national

economy is recovering in some areas and that’s welcome but a lot of industries, a lot of towns, a lot

of workers and small businesses are still doing it incredibly tough. Something like 2.2 million

Australians are still looking for work or for more hours at work. We’ve got historically stagnant

wages. For all of these reasons, the Government shouldn’t be declaring mission-accomplished over

this recession. We need to make sure that there is still targeted support for the workers, small

businesses, regions and industries which are hardest hit by the economic fallout from coronavirus

so we need to see that from the Federal Government.



There’s a story in the paper today about the level of savings that Australians have accumulated.

We want the economic recovery to be strong, broad and inclusive. We want to see money

circulating in the small businesses and local economies of Australia. Australians have accumulated

a massive amount of savings over recent months and one of the reasons for that is because there

has been so much uncertainty and people have been very concerned and very cautious. We want

to see some of those savings circulating in small businesses and local economies because that will

be one of the keys to the recovery this year, but there are no guarantees that that will happen. Just

hoping for a better outcome will not deliver that better outcome. So it’s disappointing but not

especially surprising that the Treasurer is out there today congratulating himself, patting himself on

the back, for this accumulation of household savings while we still have millions of Australians

unemployed, underemployed, or dealing with stagnant wages. His recipe for cuts to wages, cuts to

superannuation, winding back protections from the banks in the financial system will do nothing to

create the kind of jobs and opportunities that we need to see around Australia, and that we need to

see here in Townsville. We need a proper plan to support local businesses, local economies, local

industries in places like this. We haven’t got one yet from the Federal Government. Over to you.



JOURNALIST: Just one from Canberra, CSL says it cannot make Novavax here in Australia hours

after it was suggested that it might be possible to aid the rollout of vaccines here in Australia. How

much of a blow is that to public confidence in the vaccines?



CHALMERS: That's for the company and to some extent the Federal Government to explain the

inconsistency in that information. From our point of view, obviously, we want to see as many people

vaccinated as soon as possible. Our concern is that other countries have more irons in the fire

when it comes to vaccines. The Government said that they had done the deals and that Australians

were at the front of the queue but we now know that that is false. So we are playing catch up a little

bit compared to some of the other countries which we compare ourselves with. We want to see

people vaccinated. Unfortunately, the Federal Government has been too slow off the mark. They

don't have enough irons in the fire. They don't have enough deals with enough companies. That

means that when there are temporary setbacks like the one that you just asked me about, that

makes things more difficult. Other countries have done a better job getting their people vaccinated

quicker and part of the reason for that is because they've done more deals with more companies.



JOURNALIST: I've just got a question from Sydney. What do you make of Google burying

Australian news content? Do you back the Federal Government and the ACCC and what's the best

way forward?



CHALMERS: We've said all along, my colleague Michelle Rowland and I have said all along, that

there is a case for the tech platforms to pay for the journalism that they use on their sites. That

need has been obvious for some time, and we've tried to be constructive about the ACCC process.

To the extent that there has been uncertainty really for some time over that process, it's because

it's because the Government has been dragging its feet on implementing these arrangements.

First, they said it would voluntary, then they said it would be mandatory. We don't have a lot of

these issues resolved still, after more than a year. So it's up to the Government to clarify these

sorts of issues. There will be difficulties in the negotiation, we recognise that. But the sooner we

can bed down these arrangements, the better.



JOURNALIST: Just back to vaccines, Australia has the capacity to manufacture one vaccine, the

AstraZeneca vaccine. Should the Government be looking to build our capacity to make the MRNA

vaccines given they appear to be more effective?



CHALMERS: Well, clearly, it would be good for Australia if we could manufacture more of the

vaccines that are required here, but also all of the other equipment and all of the other medical

needs in this difficult period. It would be good if Australia could supply those needs more effectively

so we would support any efforts along those lines. But again, one of the issues here, the

Government as always has the big announcement followed by a big gap between announcement

and delivery. That means that you had Greg Hunt and the Prime Minister and others saying we

were at the front of the queue for these vaccines and Australians would get them soon. We've seen

failures to secure enough deals; all of these things are costly, not just for Australian industry, but for

Australians who are desperately relying on having this vaccine broadly deployed so that we can try

and get back to normal in our communities and rebuild our economy.



JOURNALIST: You talked earlier about keeping JobSeeker and other measures around to help the

economy prosper in the future. Townsville's economy has had a pretty reasonable response post

COVID. Are there things that the Federal Government can do to help continue that growth and

continue to push prices in the regions to grow their economy?



CHALMERS: That's the whole reason I'm here today to hear from people on the ground about how

the Federal Government can better support the economic recovery here in Townsville, in North

Queensland, and beyond. What we've said about JobKeeper is let's be smart about it. Let's make

sure that JobKeeper is tailored and responsive to what's actually going on in real communities, in

real small businesses, and what's happening to working families around the country, but particularly

in local areas like this. So there might be other ways that the feds can support small business in

particular and the Government should take all of those into consideration. What we've said about

this region and other regions, is that not all industries will recover at the same pace. Some parts of

the economy are going well here and around Australia, others are not going as well. Let's be smart

about it and target that support not just say that all of the support comes out at the end of the

month, end of March when people are still struggling.



JOURNALIST: So what have you learned from speaking to people here?



CHALMERS: So far I've been focused on the disaster preparation and response. But throughout

the course of the afternoon, I'll be meeting with the Mayor of Townsville to speak about economic

support there, what kinds of targeting and tailored economic support we might be able to provide

here from the federal level or the Federal Government can. But in the course of our consultations,

I'm here relatively regularly and throughout regional Queensland. The point that we would make

about the recovery and the role of regional Queensland is really this: if we want the national

economy to recover strongly and create good jobs and opportunities for more people, then we need

regional Queensland to be a bigger part of that story. You only know what's needed on the ground

here if you actually speak to people. I intend to be up here regularly between now and the election

so that our economic policies are closely aligned to needs on the ground.



JOURNALIST: Back to the Treasurer's claims, he obviously said Australia's economy will be

fuelled by household savings in the years to come. In your view, is that enough to justify ending

government support measures like JobKeeper?



CHALMERS: No, it's not. Clearly, it would be a good thing if more of the savings were circulating in

our small businesses and local economies. But one of the reasons why household savings are so

high is because people have been uncertain, concerned and cautious. And that uncertainty is not

going away entirely anytime soon. And so what we say to the federal government is don't declare

victory, don't pat yourselves on the back, don’t congratulate yourselves for these high household

savings when there's no guarantee that they will find their way into the economy. We need to be

smart about it and look to other ways that we might be able to help. Now the Government says that

they've got this hiring credit scheme coming in. But what they won't tell you is that there's a million

Australians who are unemployed and excluded from those hiring credits. So all of those people will

be left behind by the government. All along, we've recognised that the government has stepped in

in some ways, we've been supportive of JobKeeper and indeed we called for it. We've been

supportive of the higher rate of JobSeeker, we called for it. But the Government shouldn't be in a

rush to pull support from the economy when there are still parts of the economy, particularly in local

communities, that are still struggling.



JOURNALIST: There are calls from the Small Business Ombudsman who wants the federal

government to start handing out HECS-style loans. What do you make of that idea?



CHALMERS: I think any of these ideas which are offered in good faith should be considered by the

Government. We want support for small business in particular to be tailored and targeted to those

industries and small businesses that need it most. If business comes forward in good faith with

ideas, then it's up to the Government to consider that rather than just being in a rush to pull



JobKeeper out, cut wages, cut super, and wind back consumer protections. The Government

shouldn't be stubborn or pigheaded about this. They should understand what's going on in real

communities. If there are good ideas, they should consider them.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: NATHAN JOHNSTON 0488 176 452





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











